<SOURCE>https://www.dw.com/en/north-dakota-governor-orders-oil-pipeline-protesters-expelled/a-36567579</SOURCE>
<TAGS>North Dakota pipelines protests</TAGS>
We use cookies to improve our service for you. You can find more information in our data protection declaration.Adding to the pressure from the US Army Corp of Engineers, which set a December 5 deadline for clearing the protest camp, the governor has issued an order for immediate evacuation. Protesters remain unfazed.North Dakota's governor has ordered the immediate evacuation of Native American and environmental activists camped out near the construction site of the controversial Dakota Access Pipeline, against which they are protesting.Governor Jack Dalrymple's order to protesters follows a November 27 announcement from the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, which manages the cite, that set a December 5 deadline for the land to be evacuated. Both authorities have cited the safety of the people camped out in freezing temperatures as the reason for the push for their removal.The governor said his order was immediately effective, but did not specify how he would enforce it. He did say that he would direct state and local agencies to discontinue emergency assistance and other services to those who remain on the land.Organizers of the anti-pipeline protests hold a news conference on November 26, 2016.Protesters remain undeterredActivists disrupted the flow of millions of barrels of crude oil from Canada to the US by turning off valves on North America's pipeline system. An action of this magnitude by environmentalists is thought unprecedented. (12.10.2016)US authorities have said they have no plans to remove protesters near the Dakota Access Pipeline construction project. Thousands of Native American activists are resisting efforts to build the pipeline near tribal lands. (28.11.2016)Because the camp is on land managed by the federal government, county and state law enforcement do not have the power to forcibly remove campers. Morton County Commission Chairman Cody Schulz has expressed doubt that the Governor's and Army Corps's orders would deter protesters. He said that their recent statements are "self-serving and amounts to them limiting their liability".In response to the Governor's order, the chairman of the local Standing Rock Sioux Tribe Dave Archambault II denounced it as a "menacing action meant to cause fear". He doubted that authorities had the safety of the campers in mind, noting that police had sprayed protestors with a water cannon in freezing temperatures last week.Standing Rock Sioux spokesperson Phyllis Young said at a news conference Monday night that the tribe planned to remain at the camp and continue to protest the construction of the oil pipline. The tribe believes the project threatens their source of drinking water and sacred grounds."We have lived for generations in this setting. That is our camp. We will continue to provide for our people there," she said. "This is treaty territory, and no one else has jurisdiction there."Police spray protesters with a water cannon at a demonstration on November 20, 2016. Organizers reported that 17 people were taken to the hospital, some of them with hypothermia.Dallas Goldtooth, an organizer with Indigenous Environmental Network, said that the expulsion of protestors could do more harm than good. "We are in the heart of winter now", he said. "To even think of a forced removal is terrifying".Current temperatures in the region of the camp remain consistently below freezing, and the US National Weather Service has issued a winter storm warning effective through Wednesday.A controversial project from the beginningMembers of the Standing Rock Sioux Tribe have been protesting the construction of the Dakota Access Pipeline since 2014. Increasing numbers of protesters from around the country have joined them since this summer. Over 525 people have been arrested since August.The $3.8 billion (3.6 billion euros) pipeline project is meant to bring up to 570,000 barrels of crude oil daily from fracking fields in North Dakota to Illinois, passing through territory that historically has belonged to Native Americans.The local tribe fears that the pipeline would disturb historical burial grounds and could endanger the tribe's source of water, the Missouri River, under which the pipeline is supposed to pass. The company building the pipeline claims it has taken precautions against this.A vehicle passes by pipes intended for use in the construction of the Dakota Access Pipeline. The conduit is meant to bring up to 570,000 barrels of crude oil daily from fracking fields in North Dakota to Illinois, passing through territory that historically has belonged to Native Americans.The Standing Rock Sioux tribe has opposed the project since its proposal in 2014. Though the pipeline will not cross into Sioux territory, tribal leaders argue it will disturb historical burial grounds and could endanger the tribe's source of water, the Missouri River, under which the pipeline is supposed to pass. The company building the pipeline claims it has taken precautions against this.A man faces police across the Cantapeta Creek outside the Standing Rock Reservation near the town of Cannon Ball, North Dakota, where construction of the pipeline is underway. Opponents of a new oil pipeline near the Standing Rock Indian Reservation gathered outside Cannon Ball, North Dakota, on November 2, 2016A police officer uses pepper spray against protesters standing in Cantapeta Creek near the pipeline construction site. The resistance of the local tribe has gained international attention in recent weeks and the number of protesters has swelled. Even celebrities Mark Ruffalo and civil rights activist Jesse Jackson have joined in.A protester is treated with pepper spray antidote after a confrontation with the police. Tribal leaders allege that police have engaged in excessive force against protesters, leading the UN to investigate possible human rights abuses.After clashing with the police in Cantapeta Creek a young woman is consoled by a fellow protester.An elderly protester raises her arm during demonstrations against the pipeline. On November 1, US President Barack Obama said that the federal government is considering re-routing the pipeline in response to opposition. Author: Amien Essif ae/kl (Reuters, AP)In the latest clash in the US state of North Dakota, police used pepper spray and rubber bullets to disperse protesters. The local Standing Rock Sioux tribe has been fighting the pipeline's construction since 2014. (03.11.2016)
  

Demonstrators endured pouring rain ahead of an advancing typhoon to express their opposition to the US Marine base. Tokyo plans to begin pouring landfill for the new site in the coming days but opponents vow to block it. 
There is growing anger in Iran over rising inflation and the plunging value of the currency, the rial. The rising tensions come against the backdrop of looming US sanctions that are due to take effect on Tuesday. 
The headquarters of the National Rifle Association (NRA) in Virginia was the scene of the latest protest over gun laws in the US. Survivors of a mass school shooting demanded stricter controls on firearms, while counter protesters argued they have a right to self defense. 
DW News presents the most important news — in brief, quickly and up-to-date.  

© 2018 Deutsche Welle |
Privacy Policy |
Legal notice |
Contact
| Mobile version
