<SOURCE>https://www.willistonherald.com/news/north-dakota-tries-again-to-get-reimbursed-for-pipeline-protests/article_54f587da-7734-11e7-b33c-030e6795dc02.html</SOURCE>
<TAGS>North Dakota pipelines protests</TAGS>
The Herald News APP is now available in your APP store!A good deal of sunshine. Near record high temperatures. High 107F. Winds S at 10 to 20 mph..Partly cloudy skies. A stray shower or thunderstorm is possible. Low near 65F. Winds NNW at 10 to 20 mph. Updated: August 12, 2018 @ 10:25 amThe Dakota Access pipeline protests, which drew thousands of protesters to the state last year, cost North Dakota $40 million in law enforcement expenses. Now the state is making another bid for federal funds to reimburse some of those costs.In its first attempt in late April, Gov. Doug Burgum asked President Donald Trump for a disaster declaration, but the Federal Emergency Management Agency denied that request in May. The state has since submitted an application for $13.85 million to the Federal Law Enforcement Assistance Program, which provides emergency law enforcement assistance in extraordinary circumstances that pose a serious threat to public safety. It is restricted to cases where state and local resources have been exhausted or are inadequate.  While the program has not had sufficient funding in the past several years, in May, North Dakota lawmakers successfully pushed for an additional $15 million for it in the compromise congressional spending bill that funded the government through the remainder of the year. U.S. Sen. Heidi Heitkamp, R-N.D., announced Tuesday that she has sent a letter urging U.S. Attorney General Jeff Sessions to quickly approve the application from North Dakota, because the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers failed to take actions to limit the size of the protest camp and the damage done to the land, and failed to make a timely decision on whether to issue the pipeline’s final permit.“Throughout the many months of the Dakota Access pipeline protests, North Dakota law enforcement worked around the clock to keep communities, protesters, tribes, and workers safe — hoping federal agencies would step in to reinforce their efforts to keep the peace. But for months, no relief came, allowing local tensions and camps to swell as once-strong local relationships frayed, lands were damaged, and local law enforcement struggled,” Heitkamp said. “Now that Congress has opened a potential avenue for emergency funding, as I pushed for, it’s time for the Attorney General to make sure the federal government does its part by approving North Dakota’s application for the funding so that our state and local enforcement do not have to continue to bear the repercussions of the costs associated with managing the protests. The last thing we need is to have to cut law enforcement funding because of the high costs already incurred.” The Dakota Access pipeline, built by Energy Transfer Partners, will take up to 570,000 barrels per day of Bakken crude to Illinois, and then on to refineries in Texas. The project drew protest, however, after members of a nearby tribe questioned possible impacts to their water, and other issues related to their religious and cultural beliefs. Thousands joined the tribe in North Dakota to protest the pipeline, many of them identifying with environmental groups that want, in general, to keep the oil in the ground.Property damage to area ranchers’ lands and vandalism of Dakota Access property, among other incidents that were reported by law enforcement during the months-long protests, ultimately prompted a large-scale police response, with officers coming in from several other states. Members of the tribe, meanwhile, have said the police response was heavy-handed and unnecessary.The pipeline has since been completed, but the $3.8 billion project is still being contested in federal court by the tribe that began the protest, as well as a couple of other tribes along the route.We're always interested in hearing about news in our community. Let us know what's going on!