<SOURCE>https://www.pennlive.com/news/2017/05/north_dakota_officials_warn_th.html</SOURCE>
<TAGS>North Dakota pipelines protests</TAGS>
Gallery: Lancaster Against Pipelines
    
        
            By Colin Deppencdeppen@pennlive.comMonths after the culmination of a massive pipeline protest in North Dakota, officials there are warning their Lancaster County counterparts to start preparing for what may be a similar showdown between the pipeline industry and its opponents in Pennsylvania.Construction on the Lancaster County portion of the Atlantic Sunrise pipeline project is expected to begin later this year, and opponents have vowed to prevent its completion through civil disobedience and a live-in protest at the site.  It's a similar method to that employed by Native American protesters and their supporters in confronting the Dakota Access Pipeline project in North Dakota last year, a protest that some Atlantic Sunrise opponents from Lancaster County also took part in.Now, North Dakota officials are looking to impart the law enforcement lessons learned from Dakota Access to officials in Lancaster County, telling them to "Go big" and "Go fast ... before things spin out of control," LancasterOnline.com reports.Is Pa. pipeline fight on Amish farm the next Standing Rock? 'We're prepared to be here for months'According to the news site, the message was shared by nearly a dozen North Dakota state and local officials who spoke to their counterparts in Lancaster County Thursday at the request of Lancaster County Republican state Sen. Scott Martin. "Martin said the purpose of the video teleconference was to ensure the county is prepared to handle expected protests for the pipeline, which is scheduled to be buried through 37 miles of western and southern Lancaster County," LancasterOnline reports.The Atlantic Sunrise project is itself set to cross 10 Pennsylvania counties and roughly 200 miles of terrain total, leading to pockets of resistance elsewhere in the state as well.  In Lancaster County, opponents say the project threatens property owner rights, the environment and indigenous sites. The pipeline's builders at Williams Partners LP say there have been extensive route changes to address these concerns and that state and federal regulators have both signed off on the project.Federal marshals will arrest those interfering with Atlantic Sunrise project: judgeMeanwhile, core groups of locals continue to spearhead the resistance efforts in Lancaster and neighboring counties. A protest encampment has already been erected on private property near to where construction on the Atlantic Sunrise is expected to begin in Lancaster County this summer. A group behind the encampment says hundreds of locals have already signed up to participate in "peaceful, nonviolent" protests there.  But North Dakota officials say it is the potential for out-of-state groups to join them that could make the situation even more potent."Unfortunately, a lot of times these things can be overwhelmed from outside groups," Sen. Martin said Thursday. Martin noted that 94 percent of the more than 700 arrests during the Dakota Access Pipeline protests involved out-of-staters, a figure supported by government data published online before the main protest camp on the Standing Rock Indian Reservation was cleared by authorities in late February. Condemnation efforts start to obtain rights of way for Atlantic Sunrise pipelineMore recently, a judge in Huntingdon, Pa., located some two-and-a-half hours northwest of Lancaster County, ruled that landowners could themselves be arrested for trespassing on their own property if they violate a court order obtained by a pipeline company. According to a StateImpact.org report, the Gerhart family of Huntingdon County has been battling Sunoco Logistics' Mariner East 2 pipeline there and is challenging Sunoco's use of eminent domain to lay the pipeline across a portion of their 27-acre property.But a recent court order gives Sunoco the right to have the Gerharts or any other protester trespassing on the company's right of way removed by law enforcement. There have been no arrests reported so far. UPDATE: The last sentence of this article has been updated to include mention of government data supporting Sen. Martin's claim about the number of individuals from outside North Dakota who were arrested during months of Dakota Access Pipeline protests there. This article has also been updated to include the final three paragraphs concerning protests aimed at Sunoco's Mariner East 2 pipeline project in Huntingdon County. 'This is our yard': Pipeline opponents build structures to block $3B Atlantic Sunrise project
            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        
            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        
Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        
Your California Privacy Rights


 Ad Choices
