<SOURCE>https://www.ohchr.org/EN/NewsEvents/Pages/DisplayNews.aspx?NewsID=21290&LangID=E</SOURCE>
<TAGS>Dakota Access indigenous</TAGS>
See all countries >WASHINGTON, D.C. / GENEVA (3 March 2017) – A UN human  rights expert has called on all levels of government in the United States to  adopt consistent practices when consulting with indigenous tribes on projects  that could affect their rights, like the Dakota Access Pipeline. The appeal was made by the United Nations Special  Rapporteur on the rights of indigenous peoples, Victoria Tauli-Corpuz, at the  end of a mission to the US to assess the impact of energy development projects.  During the visit, Ms. Tauli-Corpuz, noted that, in spite of a US commitment to  positive and meaningful engagement with tribal governments, challenges  remained. The Special Rapporteur said: “The legislative regime  regulating consultation, while well intentioned, has failed to ensure effective  and informed consultations with tribal governments. The breakdown of  communication and lack of good faith in the review of federal projects leaves  tribal governments unable to participate in dialogue with the United States on  projects affecting their lands, territories, and resources.”
    
  Nevertheless, the Special Rapporteur saw encouraging  steps being taken by federal agencies to follow procedures set out in the UN’s  Declaration on the rights of indigenous peoples.  She said: “Since 2012, the federal government  has made commendable efforts to develop policies toward more robust measures.“I also applaud the January 2017 joint report from the  Departments of Interior, Army and Justice to solicit recommendations on  engaging tribes in infrastructure-related activities. I am encouraged by the  process of meaningful consultation with the tribes that the United States  undertook in creating this report, and applaud the efforts made by the  government to consider ways in which to improve consultation processes.”In order to meet the obligations of the UN  Declaration, Ms. Tauli-Corpuz said the United States should continue to build  efforts to incorporate principles of meaningful consultation with the goal of  obtaining free, prior, and informed consent from indigenous peoples as set out  in the Declaration. She added that given the impacts on indigenous peoples  of the Dakota Access Pipeline, she was deeply concerned by a presidential memo  on 24 January clearing away the last hurdle so that construction of the Dakota  Access Pipeline under Lake Oahe could begin. The Special Rapporteur also  expressed concern about similar issues on other projects. The Dakota Access Pipeline issue and other examples in  Ms. Tauli-Corpuz’s end of mission statement highlight the many water concerns  associated with energy development. In places like the arid west, the substantial  volumes of water used in drilling operations cause stress on water supplies.  Contamination of underground and surface waters is also a concern, with many  projects threatening vital resources in water-scarce regions.Ms. Tauli-Corpuz said: “A recent Environmental  Protection Agency study found scientific evidence that activities in the  hydraulic fracturing water cycle can affect drinking water resources through  spills, faulty well construction, discharges into surface waters, or disposal  into underground injection wells. For indigenous peoples, water provides life,  subsistence, and has undeniable spiritual significance. In Lakota, they express  this belief as ‘Mni Wiconi: water is life’.”However, the Special Rapporteur says the outlook is  not entirely bleak.  A number of tribes  have made entrepreneurial efforts to create tribal utilities for the benefit of  their own and neighbouring communities, and are involved in a wide array of  energy generation and transmission as large parts of tribal lands are used for  the national electrical grid system.“Indian tribes are owners and operators of new and  emerging technologies, breaking the mold of reliance on outside entities,” the  Special Rapporteur says. “These examples and many more are proving that by  exercising political sovereignty, indigenous peoples can approach energy  resource development in a diverse way to support economic sovereignty.”Indigenous communities in the United States want more  control over their energy resources as part of their overall desire for  self-determination with respect to their lands, territories, and resources.  They are committed to balancing many different sets of concerns in their own  approaches to energy development.The tribes rely on the income generated from natural  resources to not only support critical government programs, but also to balance  the protection of their lands, waters, and sacred places with the benefit of  revenue and jobs. “I have been very impressed by the remarkable and  unshakeable resolve tribes have to find creative ways towards  self-determination. Two such companies include the Missouri River Resources, a  wholly-owned tribal company by Mandan, Hidatsa, and Arikara Nation which is  dedicated to using best practices in the oil and gas industry to generate economic  benefits for the tribal community through responsible oil development.  Similarly, the Red Willow Production Company, a company wholly owned and  managed by the Southern Ute Tribe, has been generating revenue through oil and  gas development on their reservation since 1992 and continues to maximize  benefits for their tribal community while carefully managing their lands and  resources.”The Special Rapporteur says: “Tribes must continue to  be supported to develop capacity and resources to realize self-determination to  take advantage of their expanded authority in all areas including in energy  development and law enforcement. “I urge the government to continue to honour its  treaty and trust obligations to indigenous peoples to ensure that native  communities are not further plagued by violence,” said Ms. Tauli-Corpuz, adding  that she hoped the government would provide adequate financing. 
   
  Finally, I recommend that for any extractive industry  project affecting indigenous peoples, regardless of the status of the land, the  United States should require a full environmental impact assessment of the  project in consideration of the impact on indigenous peoples rights.” During her official visit to the United States, Ms.  Tauli-Corpuz met Government and State officials, a wide range of civil society  and human rights organizations working on indigenous rights. She also visited  indigenous communities to hear directly from them about their issues and  concerns. The Special Rapporteur will present a comprehensive  report containing her findings and recommendations to the United States  Government and the UN Human Rights in September.  ENDS
   
(*) You can read the Special Rapporteur’s end-of-mission  statement in full here The Special Rapporteur on the rights of indigenous peoples, Ms. Victoria Tauli-Corpuz (Philippines), is a human rights  activist working on indigenous peoples’ rights. Her work for more than three  decades has been focused on movement building among indigenous peoples and also  among women, and she has worked as an educator-trainer on human rights,  development and indigenous peoples in various contexts. She is a member of the  Kankana-ey, Igorot indigenous peoples in the Cordillera Region in the  Philippines.The  Special Rapporteurs are part of what is known as the Special Procedures of the Human Rights Council. Special Procedures, the largest body of  independent experts in the UN Human Rights system, is the general name of the  Council’s independent fact-finding and monitoring mechanisms that address  either specific country situations or thematic issues in all parts of the  world. Special Procedures’ experts work on a voluntary basis; they are not UN  staff and do not receive a salary for their work. They are independent from any  government or organization and serve in their individual capacity. See  the UN Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous PeoplesUN  Human Rights, country page: United States of AmericaFor  more information and media inquiries, please contact: Ms. Hee-Kyong Yoo  (+41 22 917 97 23 in Geneva / +41   79-444-4355 / hyoo@ohchr.org), Ms. Christine Evans (+41 22 917 9197 / cevans@ohchr.org) or write to indigenous@ohchr.orgFor media inquiries related to other UN  independent experts:
  Bryan Wilson, OHCHR Media  Unit (+ 41 22 917 9383 / mediaconsultant1@ohchr.org)Tag  and share - Twitter: @UNHumanRights and Facebook: unitednationshumanrights 