<SOURCE>https://ipolitics.ca/2018/05/29/kinder-morgan-purchase-is-a-declaration-of-war-indigenous-activist/</SOURCE>
<TAGS>Dakota Access indigenous</TAGS>
iPoliticsiPoliticsThe federal government has declared war on Indigenous people with its plans to buy the Trans Mountain pipeline.That’s the feeling of activist Kanahus Manuel, who calls the Secwepemc Nation home. The pipeline, which is owned by Kinder Morgan, runs through 518 km of her territory.“They are declaring war on our people because we have said no. We have said no, no passage. You cannot bring this pipeline through our lands,” she said.“I’m willing to go into a death, with my death song, into battle against Kinder Morgan right now.”Manuel, who was arrested at the Dakota Access Pipeline protest on the Standing Rock Indian Reservation in the United States, and has been a vocal opponent of the Trans Mountain expansion, isn’t alone.In a May 2 press conference at an Assembly of First Nations special meeting, Khelsilem, an elected council member of the Squamish Nation, echoed that sentiment.“Our people are willing to put our lives on the line,” he said at the time.On Tuesday, federal Finance Minister Bill Morneau said the government plans to purchase the pipeline — and all of Kinder Morgan’s core Canadian assets — for $4.5 billion if no one else buys the project by August.When asked about the concerns coming from some Indigenous communities, Indigenous Services Minister Jane Philpott said the government’s decision was in the national interest.“Obviously, the public safety is always a priority for us and we will certainly ensure that people are safe,” she said.However, NDP MP Nathan Cullen, who’s riding is in British Columbia, worried the plan could escalate tensions between the government and opponents of the pipeline.“I think rather than make things the same or better, it’s made things worse,” he said. “That’s my concern, is that this is Mr. Trudeau ramping up the tension and picking a fight that I don’t think I can win.”That has him worried.“I have faith in people who are peacefully protesting because they’ve been able to do it for this long, but Mr. Trudeau has just turned the temperature up dramatically.”NDP MP Romeo Saganash shared that concern: “I think people are willing to go perhaps to extremes to stop this pipeline.”Conservative MP Shannon Stubbs said the government made the wrong call.“That clarifies without a shadow of a doubt the announcement today has done nothing to provide certainty for either Trans Mountain or for pipeline and energy in Canada in general,” she said.“Trans Mountain opponents, they confirmed today they’ll keep right on trying to stop it.”The government has insisted the pipeline will be built, something Morneau repeated when asked about Manuel’s concerns.“We see this project as a project in the national interest,” he said. “We’re looking forward to moving forward.”Manuel warned this isn’t a move she or others will take lying down.“There’s no way that we’re going to allow Canada to get away with this.”Her brother is meeting with international insurance companies — including Aviva Plc, which has investments in Kinder Morgan — to make the corporation aware of Indigenous opposition to the project.She believes the world is watching.“Especially since Standing Rock, people are looking very closely here at how Canada reacts,” she explained.“Never fear when you’re speaking the truth. I can face off with the Canadian military, I can face off with the RCMP, and that will not scare me.”Came up on Facebook. I responded there. National interests aren’t public interests. How can they be with commerce as set in politics as it is?Such a sad day…. :(Aho! Keep the FIGHT alive!Comments are closed.Click here to subscribe.Already have an account? Log InOnly the news you need, from all the sources you know.iPolitics publishes content everyday, throughout the day.© Copyright 2018 iPolitics. All Rights Reserved.