<SOURCE>http://www.maramatanga.co.nz/news-events/event/seminar-fighting-dakota-access-pipeline-and-indigenous-justice-what-happened-where</SOURCE>
<TAGS>Dakota Access indigenous</TAGS>
Owen G. Glenn Building,
Building 260 Room 098,
​The University of Auckland
​Auckland CBDFighting the Dakota Access Pipeline and Indigenous Justice: What happened? Where do we go from here?   Starting in April 2016, thousands of people, led by Standing Rock Sioux Tribal members, gathered at camps to stop the construction of the Dakota Access Pipeline (DAPL), creating the #NoDAPL movement. The movement temporarily blocked pipeline construction, though the Trump administration in 2017 reversed this decision, permitting DAPL's construction. #NoDAPL has mobilised Indigenous peoples and allies everywhere through the philosophy of "Mni Wiconi" or "Water is Life."In this seminar, Dr. Whyte will tell some of the story of the #NoDAPL movement, cover the politics of U.S. colonialism that pushed DAPL's ultimate construction, and close with a discussion of recent legal outcomes and the future of what the movement means for Indigenous environmental justice on Turtle Island and globally.The event is for anyone, and will be informative for students and faculty, activists and concerned citizens in Aotearoa/NZ.Kyle Whyte (Potawatomi) holds the Timnick Chair in the Humanities at Michigan State University. He is Associate Professor of Philosophy and Community Sustainability. His primary research addresses moral and political issues concerning climate policy and Indigenous peoples and the ethics of cooperative relationships between Indigenous peoples and climate science organisations. He is an enrolled member of the Citizen Potawatomi Nation. His website is kylewhyte.cal.msu.edu.Please register to attend below: View conference websiteTe Hononga Pūkenga - ‘the connection of experts’, was created by Ngā Pae o te Māramatanga to make Māori and Indigenous research expertise, location and contact information readily available, in response to the need for stronger engagement between Māori Researchers and Government, the wider public/private sector and to facilitate our communities to access us as Māori & Indigenous researchers. Visit site. Earlybird registrations for this years 8th Biennial International Indigenous Research Conference (13-16 November) close on 1 August.REGISTER HERE NOW!On the 3-4 September, at Waipapa Marae, University of Auckland, NPM will once again be hosting a Media SAVVY - Media Skills Workshop for Māori researchersThis fully-funded media and communication skills workshop is offered in a partnership between Ngā o te Māramatanga and the Science Media Centre, and supported by Curious Minds – He Hihiri i te Mahara.Ngā Pae o te Māramatanga recently co-hosted 'Toi Tū Te Whānau, Toi Tū Te Kāwai Whakapapa: A workshop on whānau and whakapapa for public policy' in Wellington on 29 May 2018.Videos of the presentations made on the day are available here on NPM's Media Centre.Te Takarangi our online celebration of 150 Māori Publications recently reached 100 books with the profiling of Indigenous Data Sovereignty: Toward an Agenda.This 100th entry celebrates and acknowledges the ground-breaking work of Professor Tahu Kukutai (Waikato, Ngāti Maniapoto, Te Aupouri) and John Taylor and is the first book to focus on this new and emerging field.Continuing a proud tradition of investing in and supporting Māori graduate scholarship to create new dynamic international opportunities, Ngā Pae o te Māramatanga (NPM) is pleased to announce its most recent award recipients, in partnership with Fulbright New Zealand. 
 
The Fulbright-Ngā Pae o te Māramatanga Graduate Award is granted to promising New Zealand graduate students, in order for them to undertake one year of postgraduate study or research at a US institution in the field of Indigenous development.
 