<SOURCE>https://www.biologicaldiversity.org/news/press_releases/2016/dakota-access-pipeline-11-28-2016.html</SOURCE>
<TAGS>Dakota Access indigenous</TAGS>
 
For Immediate Release November 28, 2016Endangered Species Mural at Standing Rock Supports Tribal Push to  
              Protect Water, Sacred Land From PipelineDakota Skipper Mural Is Tenth Installment in  National Endangered Species Mural ProjectCANNON BALL, N.D.— In support of the Standing Rock Sioux tribe’s campaign to  protect their water and sacred grounds from the Dakota Access Pipeline, the  Center for Biological Diversity and artist Roger Peet have installed a mural of  an endangered butterfly at the Oceti Sakowin camp, where hundreds of tribes and  allies have gathered in peaceful protest.In addition to the threat to people, water  and sacred places, the pipeline will also kill the Dakota skipper, a rare  prairie butterfly protected under the Endangered Species Act. The brightly  colored butterfly mural is intended as a show of support of the gathering of  water protectors and to symbolize the harm the project will cause to people and  wildlife. It is painted on the side of a structure built by the “Shelter for  the Storm” project to provide shelter for indigenous media collectives during  the frigid winter. “It was an honor to paint this mural in the  Oceti Sakowin frontline camp, and to offer it to the assembled water protectors  as something bright and beautiful within the vibrant assembled communities of  First Nations peoples,” said Roger Peet, who leads the Center’s national  endangered species mural project. “The struggle at Standing Rock against the  Dakota Access Pipeline is native-led and native-voiced, and the protectors  there are facing down police violence in defense of all species, large and  small, including even the tiny but tough Dakota skipper.” Dakota skippers are small butterflies with  hooked antennae and thick, muscular bodies that enable a faster, more powerful  flight than other butterflies. They have already lost nearly two-thirds of  their original range due to loss of native prairie habitat. They are currently  found only in the eastern half of North Dakota, northeastern South Dakota and  western Minnesota, and are already extirpated in Iowa and Illinois. They were  protected as threatened under the Endangered Species Act in 2014.The U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service  acknowledged that the threatened butterflies will be harmed by construction and  maintenance of the pipeline, but issued a permit that allows the butterflies to  be killed and their habitat to be degraded. The Service suggested to the company  and the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers that the butterflies be monitored and that  voluntary conservation measures be taken to try to minimize the overall harm to  the species. “Respecting the diversity of the earth’s  cultures and people is intrinsically connected to protecting its plants and  animals, so the plight of the Dakota skipper butterfly is directly connected to  the plight of indigenous cultures that will be irreparably harmed by the  pipeline,” said Tierra Curry, a senior biologist at the Center. “The government  should stop the Dakota Access Pipeline because of the threat it poses to tribal  rights, to endangered species and to our collective future.”The pipeline will harm 19 endangered species  including the pallid sturgeon, Topeka shiner, whooping crane, interior least  tern, piping plover, rufa red knot and northern long-eared bat. The structure on which the mural was painted  is one of two designed and built by Oregon's Shelter for the Storm Project,  coordinated by activists Esther Forbyn and Matt Musselwhite. It was framed  entirely using solar power, and with timber felled and milled by hand from dead  trees in communities in southern Oregon. Two indigenous media collectives will  use the structures for warmth and power in the coming final stretch of the  struggle against the pipeline.“It's vital that indigenous voices have a  warm and safe space from which to do their work,” said Peet. “Our work to build  and decorate these structures is a small way to help amplify the native-led  struggle against the bankrupt energy systems that are destroying the world.”.Standing  Rock and Dakota Access Background
              The $3.8 billion pipeline would transport  fracked crude oil from North Dakota to Illinois. On Nov. 15, rallies were held  in all 50 states and Washington, D.C., for a national day of action urging President  Obama and the Army Corps of Engineers to permanently halt the pipeline. This  call to action from indigenous leaders in Standing Rock was in response to  increased violent repression from militarized police as the pipeline company  continues construction on sacred land, despite a voluntary hold by the Army  Corps. On Nov. 20, militarized police endangered the lives of the water  protectors by attacking them with water cannons in sub-freezing temperatures  and firing rubber bullets, pepper spray and concussion grenades that injured  more than 300 people. The Standing Rock Medic and Healer Council reports that a  21-year-old woman from New York City was severely injured by a concussion  grenade thrown by police that shattered her arm.Endangered  Species Mural Project Background
              The Dakota skipper mural is the 10th  installment in the Center’s national endangered species mural project, which  aims to increase appreciation of endangered species in communities across the  country. Murals already in place include the mountain caribou in Sandpoint,  Idaho; the Arctic grayling in Butte, Mont.; the monarch butterfly in  Minneapolis; the jaguar in Tucson, Ariz.; the blue whale and yellow-billed  cuckoo in Los Angeles; the watercress darter in Birmingham, Ala.; the pink  mucket pearly mussel in Knoxville, Tenn.; and the white fringeless orchid in  Berea, Ky. Upcoming murals are planned of the hellbender salamander in Conway,  Ark.; and the marbled murrelet, a seabird, in Arcata, Calif.The Center for Biological  Diversity is a national, nonprofit conservation organization with more than 1.1  million members and online activists dedicated to the protection of endangered  species and wild places. Go back
