<SOURCE>https://www.vogue.com/article/us-army-approved-dakota-access-pipeline</SOURCE>
<TAGS>Dakota access pipeline culture</TAGS>
The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers has granted the final easement needed to finish Energy Transfer Partners’s Dakota Access Pipeline, according to a letter sent to Congress today from Paul Cramer, the deputy assistant secretary of the army. The $3.8 billion pipeline, which will send up to 570,000 barrels of crude oil per day through North Dakota, South Dakota, Illinois, and Iowa along 1,168 miles of pipe is set to pass under the Missouri River, just upstream of the Standing Rock Sioux tribe reservation. It had been delayed for several months after protests from thousands of climate activists who joined the water protectors of the Standing Rock Sioux tribe, who consider much of that land to be sacred, who rely on that likely-to-be-polluted water supply, and who are, in all likelihood, sick and tired of being kicked off of their own land (or worse) for the convenience and the profit of the United States government.In early December, the Army Department had confirmed that it would not grant the easement and allow the pipeline to continue construction until there had been some environmental testing and an exploration of “alternate routes,” citing the concerns of tribal officials “over the risk that a pipeline rupture or spill could pose to its water supply and treaty rights,” while the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers acknowledged the previous month that “additional discussion and analysis are warranted in light of the history of the Great Sioux Nation’s dispossession of lands.” (To remind, this pipeline was diverted through their sacred lands to get it farther away from more heavily populated cities.) Four days after President Trump—a former investor in Energy Transfer Partners—took the oath of office (and eight days before Exxon Mobil CEO Rex Tillerson became Secretary of State), he signed the “Presidential Memorandum Regarding Construction of the Dakota Access Pipeline”, which removed the planet-preserving roadblocks that had been put in place by the previous administration in the name of “expediting environmental reviews” and “reducing regulatory burdens,” as Trump said at the time.  As Rebecca Bengal wrote in January, the order was “swiftly and roundly denounced by Greenpeace, the Sierra Club, and by Senator Bernie Sanders . . . No DAPL and No KXL rallies were announced in Washington, D.C., and in New York City. The Indigenous Environmental Network called Trump’s actions 'insane and extreme, and nothing short of attacks on our ancestral homelands as Indigenous peoples.'“ A new sense of resistance was stoked amongst water protecters and regular citizens alike.Today, Reuters reported that the “numerous activists who have been protesting in North Dakota have vowed to stay, although the primary protest camp is located on a flood plain on Army Corps land and is in the process of being cleared.” (Last week, according to NPR, more than 70 people were arrested in conjunction with the protests.) Cramer’s letter calls the Army’s decision “consistent with the direction” made out by Trump’s memo on January 24, and says that construction may begin as soon as Wednesday afternoon; the  Chicago Tribune has reported that a request by the tribe to halt the project was not granted by a U.S. district judge. This seems to be, in most senses, the last stand.The president has repeatedly made it clear that he intends to ignore the voices of millions of American citizens and to follow through on his campaign promises, however shortsighted or deeply misguided they may be. Putting profits from the fossil fuel industry ahead of the future of the planet is one surefire way to get that message across.Part of CN Fashion & Beauty©  2018    Condé Nast. All rights reserved.Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).  Your California Privacy Rights   The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached, or otherwise used, except with the prior written permission of Condé Nast.  Ad Choices   CN Fashion & BeautyVogue may earn compensation on sales through affiliate programs.