<SOURCE>https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Talk%3ADakota_Access_Pipeline_protests%2FArchive_1?oldformat=true</SOURCE>
<TAGS>Dakota access pipeline culture</TAGS>
Should this article be the headquarters for all of this, with a teeny summary section and a {{main}} in Standing Rock Indian Reservation,  Bakken pipeline, and ReZpect Our Water?
Should ReZpect Our Water be a section within this article and not exist as a standalone? Best wishes and thanks again. :) Anna Frodesiak (talk) 00:29, 25 October 2016 (UTC)
I'm concerned that some information is being left out or inaccurately reported. I can get to it a little later. The Sacred Stone Camp was started in April by LaDonna Brave Bull Allard. It's on her land. It wasn't started by the band.Indigenous girl (talk) 19:26, 25 October 2016 (UTC)
As I continue to read through the article I'm noticing that it's pretty much been destroyed with inaccurate information. Is it possible to lock it for clean up? The original ReZpect Our Water article was much more on point. Is this part of the UMASS project? If so why wasn't there a courtesy notice? Indigenous girl (talk) 19:35, 25 October 2016 (UTC)
As this is where the merge discussion took place, I decided to save this talk page even though it has only been in existence for 24 hours or so. The old talk page for this article is still archived at the redirect. - CorbieV ☊ ☼ 22:42, 25 October 2016 (UTC)
This was originally just the sections about the protests at Standing Rock Indian Reservation and Bakken pipeline copy pasted here. That content remains at those articles but should be stripped away to deter expansion there. New info should land here. Content at those two articles plus content at ReZpect Our Water makes coverage of this notable subject shared by three articles, now four. There is plenty of unique and duplicate content at the those other three articles. Please help get this sorted out. Best, Anna Frodesiak (talk) 00:37, 25 October 2016 (UTC)
As @Gandydancer: has spent much of the summer doing the research, sourcing and writing for this article and all the ones that use content from it, I am making the above proposal formal, that we:
Rename ReZpect Our Water to Dakota Access Pipeline protests, and use the Rezpect article as the base for incorporating any new content (such as what has been added to the DAPp article over the last 22 hrs since its creation). 
The Rezpect article is more comprehensive, and that was the name most-sourced when the news coverage began. But now the Dakota Access name is thoroughly-sourced and has become more prominent. I think the actual ReZpect group can be a subsection in that article, and we can try to fit as much as possible in one place unless it needs to be moved out into its own main article for space reasons. - CorbieV ☊ ☼ 16:08, 25 October 2016 (UTC) ETA See Beagel's summation below. That's the order in which we should do this. - CorbieV ☊ ☼ 18:29, 25 October 2016 (UTC)
I had initially stayed out of editing these articles in case admin actions were needed. But looking now.... wow. There is a ton of misinformation that has been added recently. Gandydancer's original is very good and accurate. I'm going to go ahead and start gutting the inaccuracies in preparation for the merge. - CorbieV ☊ ☼ 19:43, 25 October 2016 (UTC)
Ack. @Gandydancer:, are you up to slashing and burning this thing? I just realized I don't have time right now, and you're most on top of this. This thing is riddled with inaccuracies. I would be fine on just blanking it and doing the page move, but I'd like you to look it over first and see if there's anything worth merging into ReZpect. - CorbieV ☊ ☼ 19:48, 25 October 2016 (UTC)
I commented below under Anna Frodesiak apology. This is not up to Wikipedia standards. The fact that the camp timeline and founding wasn't even right doesn't show due diligence. This needs fixing asap. I'm unable to slash and burn at the moment and slash and burn won't help if you look at the way the current article is structured. It would require a rewrite. Gandydancer already did the work. Can we just retitle and move pertinent info? With all of the disinformation out there Wikipedia doesn't need to be adding to it. Heck there wasn't even any mention of the issues surrounding Neil Young's lyric changes for crying out loud with the mention of the song he wrote. If your going to add content it needs to be unbiased. There were indigenous people who were exteremely offended by his use of squaw. He changed the lyrics.Indigenous girl (talk) 20:10, 25 October 2016 (UTC)
I'd like to request that, unless it's a major part of the actions, lawsuits and coverage, if people want to write about celebrities involved in this effort, that they go to those celebrities' articles and add a mention there, linking to this article for more information. That way, you fulfill that person's wish to signal-boost for this issue, and you bring more of that person's fans here to read this article, rather than risk making too much of this article about them. The involvement of famous people does bring attention, but they are not more important than the regular people who actually live there and who will have to live with the results of this. Thank you. - CorbieV ☊ ☼ 20:49, 26 October 2016 (UTC)
I am sorry to have caused all this fuss. Again, it stems from my not inspecting the ResZpect article due to a nasty ISP issue. Had I viewed it, I never would have started the protest article. I saw the links to ResZpect but thought it must be some small organization. I had never seen it in the news despite never missing a DemocracyNow! ever, ever.
On the upside, this one-article-in-three-places thing is getting sorted out, and it needed to be. On the downside, and the only collateral damage (because the reservation and pipeline articles and ResZpect were never touched), are these discussions and the work dear BrillLyle put in copy editing this article. But I must bear the brunt. BrillLyle, I am in your debt and service. Please task me. I hereby owe you at least two hours of leg work. You want an article sourced, just say. Cleanup? I'm there. Emailing people for images? I'm on it. Again, my apologies. Anna Frodesiak (talk) 19:45, 25 October 2016 (UTC)

This article has been entirely white washed. Gandydancer wrote an article that was extremely well researched. What is here is inaccurate at best, at worst it removes pertinent individuals and actions from the movement and the timeline is spotty. At this point I'm for blanking the entire article. I can see no way to go in an fix it.Indigenous girl (talk) 20:02, 25 October 2016 (UTC)
I think the most powerful quote from Ms. Allard is the interview where she talks about how quickly all the water on the reservation will be undrinkable. But I need to remember which interview that's in. The previous blockquote... without all the stuff contextualizing the prophecy, I think it's best we stick to archaeology and history rather than praying against the black snake. Without knowing the full story and symbolism, which I don't really want to try to explain on Wikipedia, it might be confusing to people and too metaphysical for the topic. - CorbieV ☊ ☼ 01:57, 28 October 2016 (UTC)
I was in a rush to remove this from the pipeline article and moved it here for consideration and discussion. I'm going to go ahead and do a few things with it as time permits... Gandydancer (talk) 14:54, 27 October 2016 (UTC)
In August and September 2016, protests have taken place in several parts of the country, including Salt Lake City,[1] Portland,[2] Seattle,[3] Washington D.C.,[4] and demonstrations in Europe, Japan and New Zealand have taken place.[5]
The Episcopal Church (United States) took a stance in support of the protests, after their presiding bishop Michael Curry (bishop) released a statement "It's my hope that the federal government, working with the various (tribal) nations who are affected by the pipeline, and working with the company involved, can come to a reasonable resolution, one that honors the need for energy but that does so in ways that protect the environment that God has given all of us and that respects sacred burial grounds of the native, indigenous people that live there."[6] Bishop Curry visited Standing Rock September 24 – 25, 2016 for further support of the Native American tribal voices.[7]
American celebrities such as Leonardo DiCaprio, Pharrell Williams, Jane O'Meara Sanders, Ben Affleck, Ray Fisher (actor), Gal Gadot, Jason Momoa, Ezra Miller,[8] Susan Sarandon, Riley Keough, and Shailene Woodley[9] have also voiced their opposition to the construction of the pipeline.[10]
On September 13, The Daily Show aired a segment in which comedian Hasan Minhaj interviewed Native American protesters. [11]
On September 15, the comedy podcast Politically Re-Active dealt with #DAPL by speaking with filmmaker Benalex Dupris.
[12]
On September 21, American actress Shailene Woodley was interviewed alongside Bernie Sanders on NBC's Late Night with Seth Meyers. After Meyers asked Woodley a question about the Millenial generation on the issue, Woodley responded that with today's internet and technology, young people are able to investigate for themselves , and hold any government/politician accountable.[13] A few weeks after the interview, Woodley filmed a 2-hour live video of the protests at the pipeline. According to Woodley, the protestors were asked to vacate the site by officials, and her group abided. When Woodley returned to her RV, she was greeted by police, who immediately singled out and arrested her. Woodley said to her live audience "So everybody knows we were going to our vehicle, which they had all surrounded and waiting for me with giant guns and a giant truck behind them just so they could arrest me. I hope you're watching mainstream media.... it's because I'm well known. It's because I have 40,000 people watching."[14] Woodley was released from jail on October 13, on charges of Criminal Tresspass. By then, her live video had reached 4.4 million views, and the attention of many other celebrities.[15]
References
Came here and noticed the line:
This is not cool for a number of reasons. Neither source actually reports the destruction as fact; they attribute it to Tribal officials and activists. Neither source is WP:RS and the second is a self-published YouTube video on a blog. The language is overly emotive ("irreplaceable, unique, historic, sacred") and the attribution ("Tribal peoples are outraged") is puffery.
I fixed this one particular line but there seem to be more problems in this article. Protestors are described largely in their own flowery, self-promoting language ("cultural preservation and spiritual resistance"); at one point a completely crazy legal rationale claiming that Indian activists are entitled to seize land under eminent domain according to their interpretation of treaty rights is presented without comment as if it might be plausible. There is an overly long blockquote from what is basically an impassioned speech by a protestor. There is no discussion at all of the economic value of oil extraction & pipelines and basically no discussion of pipeline safety other than references to oil spills and activists' fears. There is no comparison of the safety of pipelines with the safety of the railway tanker cars currently being used to transport oil.
Part of the problem may be that the slow MSM uptake on this story has made it more difficult to cover without relying on the activists themselves and sympathetic left-wing sources. Still, there should be at least local newspaper stuff, and ultimately if it's not in reliable sources it shouldn't be here. TiC (talk) 03:28, 28 October 2016 (UTC)
I've written to rezpectourwater.com asking if they have images, and for the email to be passed on to those who are on site taking photos. Let's hope some come in. Anna Frodesiak (talk) 22:51, 28 October 2016 (UTC)
Our article says "Citing eminent domain,[22] the Native American protesters have declared that the land rightly belongs to them under the Treaty of Fort Laramie (1851), which established the Great Sioux Reservation", which is cited to this source.
Wasn't it the 1868 Fort Laramie treaty that established the Great Sioux Reservation (that article appears to have that correct)? And it was that treaty which covered the land in question (Standing Rock). The 1851 Treaty covered mostly South Dakota and in particular the Black Hills.
I have no idea what the Indigenous Rising website/project is or whether this source is reliable. I see that this cites claims by the protesters so that part may be factual. It could also be the case that Standing Rock and the land around it, at the time of 1851 treaty wasn't in dispute so it wasn't the focus of the treaty. Still, the part about the Great Sioux Reservation being established by the 1851 treaty is incorrect and also not in the source. So at best there's a bit of synthesis going on here.Volunteer Marek (talk) 05:41, 30 October 2016 (UTC)
A map of the region showing the proposed pipeline path would be helpful for those of us not familiar the area.  Kevink707 (talk) 20:24, 31 October 2016 (UTC)
I think this part of the lead "...also known by hashtags such as NoDAPL" would read a bit better as "...commonly abbreviated as NoDAPL" or "...commonly abbreviated as NoDAPL in media coverage" --there may be readers that come across this article that don't know what a hashtag is. Thoughts? -Melodyschamble (talk) 15:27, 1 November 2016 (UTC)
There is a proposal which concerns also this article. To keep the discussion in one place, please discuss it there. Beagel (talk) 09:31, 30 October 2016 (UTC)

If a comparison to the Keystone XL pipeline is going to remain, it needs to be accurate and backed up by the sources.  The New Yorker reference currently provided has this to say about the comparison: Their foe, most directly, is the federal government, in particular the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, which has approved a path for the pipeline across the Missouri under a “fast track” option called Permit 12. That’s one reason the Dakota Access Pipeline, as it’s known, hasn’t received the attention that, say, the Keystone XL Pipeline did, even though the pipe is about the same length. This does not support an assertion that the two pipelines have "almost identical" routes - in fact, Dakota Access is several hundred miles east of Keystone XL, avoiding the particularly environmentally sensitive routing through the Sand Hills of Nebraska. (Dakota Access doesn't even pass through Nebraska at all, so the differences are much more than "the addition of land in Iowa".)
As best I can tell, the only thing in common between the two pipelines is their purpose: to transport crude oil from the Bakken Formation to the rest of the US pipeline network. Secondary to this, there has been opposition to both pipelines from a climate change perspective, but in neither case was climate change the primary justification for opposition. Keystone XL passed through extensive environmentally-sensitive wetlands overlying the recharge area for the Ogalalla Aquifer, which posed a risk of catastrophic regional groundwater contamination in the event of a spill. Dakota Access instead passes through illegally-expropriated Sioux land and sensitive archaeological sites; a spill would threaten the portion of the Missouri River used as a drinking water supply for the Standing Rock Reservation. 
I think the best way to address this is to simply avoid making comparisons to Keystone XL, as including one would seem to require inappropriate levels of synthesis. 121.98.124.75 (talk) 20:22, 1 November 2016 (UTC)
Have you read the sources? The comparison is apt and it is sourced. - CorbieV ☊ ☼ 23:54, 1 November 2016 (UTC)
Something to click once in a while:
Anna Frodesiak (talk) 02:39, 27 October 2016 (UTC)
I'm pleased to say this all this fine writing is now getting more views. It just got 2,335 visits yesterday compared to 25 or so ReZpect our Water used to get. However, it does not appear at 1st position page one of a Google search like other Wikipedia articles. So, will that happen? How to make that happen? Will a bunch of redirects help? Considering the importance of this article, shouldn't it be getting more than 5,000 visits a day at some point and be 1st spot at Google? Anna Frodesiak (talk) 20:49, 28 October 2016 (UTC)
Nearly 7,000 hits yesterday. Yay! :) Anna Frodesiak (talk) 03:31, 31 October 2016 (UTC)
This article is seriously unbalanced in its coverage. Currently there is almost no discussion of the "other side's" position in this dispute. I have attached a tag to reflect this problem. -Ad Orientem (talk) 18:35, 1 November 2016 (UTC)
I agree that driveby NPOV tagging without substantial effort to improve is disruptive. As addressed below, and other sources are findable when I have more time, this is a return of KXL, with a lot of the identical concerns, threats and players. The comparison is important and apt and shouldn't be buried. I think KXL belongs in the lede as it's really a huge, if under-reported, part of why this fight is so intense and has involved so many quiet deals and broken laws. I don't know if the plan to break the laws and pay the fines later has been sufficiently documented in WP:RS sources, but it's a huge part of this story. Also, covering a protest movement will always seem "biased" to those who think protest movements shouldn't exist. This happens on every article about social movements that deal with civil rights or other contentious issues. - CorbieV ☊ ☼ 00:07, 2 November 2016 (UTC)
Hello all. I've removed the most of the text from the Sioux page, under the Protest of the Dakota Access pipeline section, and replaced it with a link to this article. I also recycled some of the text and put it in this article. There's more that can be added to, just check out the Sioux article's diff page. Cheers
Mannydantyla (talk) 21:55, 2 November 2016 (UTC)
So sorry to start it in this jumbled form with so much redundant content. I have no idea where to begin sorting this out. Please help.
Maybe a timeline would be a good way to handle things. Anna Frodesiak (talk) 18:46, 24 October 2016 (UTC)
This is a very sensitive situation and we need to be very careful about what we report and what sources we are using.  I have replaced the information with the report done by a Seattle reporter on the PBS Newshour to avoid claims that the article is biased.  That said, her report is excellent and IMO better than information about a horse that according to one report was shot dead right under the rider, according to another report needed to later be put down, and I'm sure that there are further reports that say no horses were injured...  Gandydancer (talk) 04:42, 3 November 2016 (UTC)
As the movement grows and the article grows along with it, I feel that this section is no longer appropriate.  I would have like to keep it without the heading or Facebook quote, but could not find a place to put it.  Any ideas/thoughts? Gandydancer (talk) 19:14, 3 November 2016 (UTC)
The Morton County Sheriff requested police from surrounding areas to assist in regulating the protests near the pipeline. The Dane County Sheriff's office of Wisconsin sent 10 deputies to aid the local police,[1] but they were recalled a few days later due to opposition from the Dane County residents and county officials.[2]
Dane County Supervisor John Hendrick posted an open letter to Sherrif Mahoney: 
"We are disturbed that Dane County is contributing to this disproportionate law enforcement response, apparently justified by misrepresentations about the nature and actions of those gathered to express opposition to the Dakota Access Pipeline... This deployment is the first time in anyone's memory that the County has entered into a dispute in another state many miles from Wisconsin. This is a troublesome precedent. We urge you to reverse this action immediately."[3]References

Why is the main image on the article so heavily edited, with sepia tones?  Image comment has editorial content?  Reason for this? — Preceding unsigned comment added by Mercster (talk • contribs) 18:55, 31 October 2016 (UTC)
Would there be any disagreement about cutting this info by about half?  Gandydancer (talk) 04:54, 2 November 2016 (UTC)
Just curious, but every day I notice the lack of anything related to NoDAPL in the "Ongoing:" blurb beneath the current events like the Cubs' WS win. This has been major news for months. The fact that most news outlets aren't running stories on it is confusing, but Wikipedia should definitely NOT follow their lead. There are more "ongoing" news events than Mosul. Honestly, WTF? Avalyn (talk) 12:16, 8 November 2016 (UTC)

Articles: Dakota Access Pipeline (talk, history) and Dakota Access Pipeline protests (talk, history)Blurb: ​The DAPL has received international funding and attention. In the past few days, one funder has announced that it is considering pulling out, while Vice Presidential candidate Tim Kaine has publicly supported Obama administration efforts to find an alternate route for the pipeline.News source(s): The Guardian Democracy Now! NY Times CBC.ca, Liberation,
Nominator's comments: This story is prominent in the news and there are two articles which are being kept updated with developments.  One of the pages was previously nominated on October 31st. NEEDS SIGNING
When two sources disagree, and both are "reliable enough", what do we do? Never ran into it before now. 24.21.141.46 (talk) 07:50, 24 November 2016 (UTC)
There are a couple of items that I find to be difficult interpretations of the cited text, or I find inconsistencies with the sources being used.
“The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers conducted a limited review of the route and issued a finding of no significant impact. They have not conducted an area-wide full environmental impact assessment.[5] “
This item is cited from the Seattle Times. The actual text of the article reads as follows:
“The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers Omaha District issued a finding of no significant impact after a limited review that included no environmental-impact statement, a more comprehensive review the tribe and its advocates are insisting on.”
I read the Seattle Times article to mean that an environmental-impact statement was not included in their findings.  It does not mean that they have not conducted an area-wide full environmental impact assessment.  In fact, as USACE’s responsibility is to conduct environmental impact studies for watersheds that they are responsible for, I find it difficult to believe that an environmental survey wouldn’t be conducted.  I do not know what an “area-wide full environmental impact assessment” would be, but my guess is that it is an assessment which is broader in scope then the environmental concerns of the waterways themselves.  Which is what USACE is looking at.
Following this is the following statement:
“In March and April 2016 the Environmental Protection Agency, the Department of Interior, and the Advisory Council on Historic Preservation asked the Army Corps of Engineers to conduct a formal Environmental Impact Assessment and issue an Environmental Impact Statement. In July, however, the Army Corps of Engineers approved the water crossing permits for the Dakota Access Pipeline under a "fast track" option, and construction of the disputed section of pipeline continued.”
The source for this statement is “Common Dreams”, which is an arguably liberal media source (as is evidence by their slogan “Breaking News & Views for the Progressive Community).  I do not see this as a legitimate news source for this content.  
A reputable source would be the source document from the DoI[1] or from the EPA[2] that show the actual correspondence from these government agencies.  The lettering from the EPA indicates that a draft environmental assessment was produced and submitted to the EPA, in keeping with the Nationwide Permit 12 requirements.
The way that the content of the letters is presented is misleading from the article that is currently referenced.  I would argue that the explicit bias in the article is attempting to create a specific image of those individuals responsible for building the pipeline. This same tone (and the same information) is repeated throughout the wiki page.
The last citation in that paragraph (#75) goes to the wrong citation, I think. A better citation would be the USACE statement on their website. [3]
In the Background section, there is another reference to citation #6, the “Common Dreams” site.  This one reads:
“Using the Nationwide Permit 12 process that treats the pipeline as a series of small construction sites, the pipeline was granted an exemption from the environmental review required by the Clean Water Act and the National Environmental Policy Act.[6] “
Except that isn’t what a Nationwide Permit does.  According to the 2017 Nationwide Permits Federal Register Notice, the following is a requirement for the Nationwide Permit (NWP):
“National Environmental Policy Act Compliance We have prepared a draft decision document for each proposed NWP. Each draft decision document contains an environmental assessment (EA). The EA includes the public interest review described in 33 CFR 320.4(b)”[4]
The information about the NWP 12 is misleading, and does not accurately reflect the process that the engineers would have had to go through for their process.  In truth, a lot of the information as it appears on the wiki page currently is misleading, and provides a slanted view of the topic.
Zombi.Don (talk) 22:42, 23 November 2016 (UTC)
References
References
The first sentence of this article says: The Dakota Access Pipeline protests, also known by hashtags such as #NoDAPL, are a grassroots movement that began in the spring of 2016 in reaction to the proposed construction of Energy Transfer Partners' Dakota Access Pipeline.  It seems strange as for that time most of the pipeline was already built. If the construction has started, it is not 'proposed' any more. Or if it means that the protests started as a reaction to the proposed route in the certain area where construction had not started for that time, this sentence should be specified accordingly. Beagel (talk) 17:08, 25 November 2016 (UTC)
I removed discussion of Trump's ownership of stock / Warren's beliefs as to what a Trump presidency would lead to happen for the pipeline, because I don't think this is pertinent (here).  There's nothing about "protest" in it.  The protests at Clinton headquarters in the Bronx in late October might have been more pertinent for a while, but nobody has added that back for the historical record yet. SashiRolls (talk) 15:36, 30 November 2016 (UTC)
