<SOURCE>https://www.gq.com/story/dapl-chase-iron-eyes-interview</SOURCE>
<TAGS>Dakota access pipeline culture</TAGS>
Subscribe NowGet the Magazine1 Year for $15A conversation with Chase Iron Eyes, protester and lawyer for the Lakota People’s Law Project.Time is running out in the fight against the Dakota Access Pipeline. Today is the official deadline for protesters, who have occupied the construction site for months, to vacate their camps. Energy Transfer Partners is moving forward with construction after President Trump issued an order to basically fast-track final approval from the Army Corps of Engineers. The pipeline could be operational within a month.Efforts to slow down the pipeline have dwindled. Two tribal authorities, the Standing Rock Sioux Tribe and the Cheyenne River Sioux Tribe, have filed suit but had their requests for a stay on construction denied; a third is scheduled for the end of the month. And the protestors, called water protectors, have been ordered by federal, state, and tribal authorities to vacate while the Standing Rock Sioux, the tribe leading the fight in court, has largely pulled back its support for the on-the-ground protesters.Throughout the protests, North Dakota’s militarized police have been on full display with rubber bullets, water cannons, and tear gas. Chase Iron Eyes, a lawyer specializing in Indian affairs with the Lakota People’s Law Project, was one of more than 70 protesters arrested at a nearby camp on private property. Iron Eyes spoke with GQ earlier this week about the thorny history and laws surrounding the NO DAPL standoff, and the Hail Mary options left if the Native nations’ legal strategies fall through.GQ: Though Energy Transfer Partners are behind construction of the pipeline, the Army Corps of Engineers, which oversees U.S. waterways, is one of the major players here. Earlier this month, the Army Corps reversed a decision to complete a new environmental-impact study before going through with construction, and they wouldn’t be accepting public comments, all against recommendations by the EPA. Can you describe the relationship between Native American communities and the Corps?
Chase Iron Eyes: You have to realize the historic backdrops. [In] December 1875,* the U.S. Army sent a directive to all of the Indians that were outside of the reservation and weren’t complying with the forced-assimilation project: If you don’t return, you will be declared hostile and the full strength of the U.S. military will be used to subdue you. This includes the Sioux tribes, who defeated the U.S. military at Little Bighorn. The Army Corps of Engineers, a branch of that same body, issued the same directive in December 2016 to the water protectors. In so many words, if you don’t leave and return to the confines of your reservation, you will be declared trespassers, and the weight of U.S. justice “law and order” will be used to prosecute you.This is an organization that in 1958 flooded our most fertile lands for a dam, causing economic destruction. That may be deliberate or it may be incidental, but the fact remains that we were ethnically cleansed from our own homelands and lost our most fertile lands.North Dakota governor Doug Burgum has issued an order saying that all camps have to be cleared by Wednesday. How are the protesters still on the ground reacting to the deadline and the Army Corps moving closer and closer to the main camp?
The Army Corps has indicated that on February 22, they’re going to call for law-enforcement assistance from the county and possibly the National Guard. Essentially, they’re going to raid the camp. So everybody on the ground is concerned right now and doing their best to live day to day with that. But they really need the assistance of one of these Native nations to back their international claim and to exercise the international authority to speak on behalf of those who are defending their treaty rights. But... the Standing Rock Sioux Tribe has abandoned the ground fight. Though they’re continuing the court challenge, as of this date there’s no Native nation providing that legal cover to water protectors.So if one of the Native nations supported the water protectors now, would the Army Corps not have standing to force their removal?
That’s what would be called into question. The United States under President Trump would definitely assert that they have full authority to move in since this is quote “their land,” and they have no intention of honoring treaties. But we need a Native nation to step forward and exhibit real leadership, to say, “Those water protectors are under our protection, and we will exhaust all avenues available in international arenas to determine our destiny and govern by our own rules.”But maybe the assimilation project is too far gone. Maybe we don’t have that kind of leadership anymore.With the water protectors gone, then all of the bets are in the ongoing court cases. There’s one more pending, from the Oglala Sioux Tribe, that may be a stronger claim than the previous two. But what options are left if that fails?
We are looking to bring a suit to renegotiate the treaty relationship between Native nations and the United States. There are multiple ways that Native nations are oppressed. Under United States law, which has been militarily imposed on us, Native nations don’t hold superior sovereign title to their own land. We want to challenge that, and we want to assert that U.S. states have no civil, criminal, regulatory, or taxation authority within Native nations. But that’s easier said than done because we’re poor. We’ve had a poverty culture imposed upon us since those early days of being declared hostile. It’s not a majority of Sitting Bulls and Crazy Horses around here. It’s a majority of people who have been conditioned to be compliant.“This struggle is 500 years old. It’s never-ending.”You’re talking about a plan to revise treaty agreements with the U.S. How do you even start turning that wheel?
The first step is getting original treaty signatory descendants to align with representatives of modern tribal governments to bring such a claim. There’s a myriad of issues—genocide, land theft, loss of language, forced assimilation—so we want to focus on something that’s achievable. And right now, it’s these very technical legal concepts that have been used to subdue and dehumanize Native nations, very successfully.We are a state without a country, considered domestic dependent nations by this body of law. If we act outside the scope of that, they come down on us hard with the full might of the most powerful military in the world.I’m sure there’s never a good time for something like this—the United States doesn’t react well to challenges to its sovereignty—but this is a belligerent administration.
We’ve deliberated for a long time about pursuing these claims in a political arena, but what we’ve been lacking since 1973 was a ground presence to force these issues into a place where they could not be ignored. We have, for now, a ground presence that applies pressure. To be 100 percent honest, we might not be able to do that yet. But for whatever it’s worth—and it’s worth a lot if I’m talking to you right now and you represent GQ—it’s worth a lot to tell this story and to impart the idea of original indigenous thought and nationhood in the Western hemisphere, a hemisphere that we civilized before Europeans stumbled onto it. This struggle is 500 years old. It’s never-ending.Update: An earlier version of this article misstated the date the U.S. Army issued an ultimatum to Native Americans which, according to the National Parks Service, was December 6, 1875.Subscribe now and get a FREE weekender bag and the GQ Style Guide. react-text: 305 ©  /react-text  react-text: 306 2018 /react-text  react-text: 307  Condé Nast. All rights reserved. /react-text Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18). Your California Privacy Rights. The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the prior written permission of Condé Nast.Ad Choices