<SOURCE>https://www.teenvogue.com/story/dakota-access-pipeline-explained-controversy</SOURCE>
<TAGS>Dakota access pipeline culture</TAGS>
 react-text: 114 Shailene Woodley's recent arrest over charges of  /react-text criminal trespassing react-text: 116  while protesting the Dakota Access Pipeline in North Dakota has brought lots of attention to the construction project this week. But the protests against the pipeline have been going on  /react-text since April react-text: 118 , when the Standing Rock Sioux Tribe stood alongside hundreds of Native American people to object to the four-state crude oil pipeline being built on Native American sacred burial spots and historical sites. On Monday (which is also recognized as  /react-text Indigenous Peoples' Day react-text: 120 , hundreds gathered to continue the protest — which gained national attention when Shailene was arrested for her own peaceful protest. /react-text But why are Shailene and so many others protesting this project? Here's the back story on the pipeline, and why it's so controversial.What is the Dakota Access Pipeline? react-text: 125 The  /react-text crude oil pipeline react-text: 127  spans nearly 1,200 miles — crossing through North Dakota, South Dakota, Iowa, and Illinois — and will carry 470,000 barrels (and up to 570,000 barrels) of crude oil per day. Champions for the pipeline  /react-text believe its completion react-text: 129  will allow America to become more energy independent and better transport domestic oil from North Dakota to Midwest and East Coast markets. According to the  /react-text U.S. Department of Transportation react-text: 131 , pipelines are the safest mode of transporting crude oil, making the pipeline an efficient way to export North Dakota's oil to the rest of the country. However, climate activists  /react-text warn react-text: 133  that the potential environmental pollution and danger are not worth the economic benefits. /react-text Why Are People Protesting? react-text: 137 Protestors say that continuing to build this oil pipeline on its current path would destroy a major Sioux archaeological site, as well as potentially threaten the  /react-text primary water source react-text: 139  for the Native American tribe. /react-text  react-text: 141 The Standing Rock Sioux tribe  /react-text objected react-text: 143  to the Dakota Access Pipeline several times in court by suing the federal agency that approved the pipeline, called the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. On Sunday, federal judges ruled that the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers could  /react-text continue construction react-text: 145  on a portion of the Dakota Access Pipeline that threatens the Standing Rock water source of Lake Oahe, but noted that the Sioux historical sites are  /react-text still not cleared react-text: 147  by the government for pipeline construction. The court ruling led hundreds of protesters to gather to protect Lake Oahe and protest the continued building of the pipeline. According to the  /react-text Duluth News Tribune react-text: 150 , 2,500 to 3,000 Native Americans and other protesters have regularly camped along the highway since construction of the pipeline began. /react-text Environmental ConcernsCritics of the pipeline react-text: 155  believe that building it upstream of the Sioux tribe’s water supply puts it in danger if an oil spill occurs at at the site.  /react-text Senator Bernie Sanders react-text: 157  called for a full environmental and cultural impact analysis of the pipeline in September, saying that, "When that analysis takes place, this pipeline will not continue." Upon receiving approval to continue the project this week, Energy Transfer Partners, which is building the pipeline,  /react-text released a statement react-text: 159  affirming its commitment to protecting cultural resources, the environment, and public safety. /react-text Pipeline Construction Halted Despite Court ApprovalDespite receiving a federal thumbs up to continue building the pipeline, the Army Corps has not resumed construction. Instead, it issued a joint statement with the U.S. Department of Justice saying, “The Army continues to review issues raised by the Standing Rock Sioux Tribe and other Tribal nations and their members and hopes to conclude its ongoing review soon.  In the interim, the Army will not authorize constructing the Dakota Access Pipeline on Corps land bordering or under Lake Oahe. We repeat our request that the pipeline company voluntarily pause all construction activity within 20 miles east or west of Lake Oahe." The statement echoed respect for peaceful protest as the pipeline construction awaits review and approval. react-text: 164 According to  /react-text The Wall Street Journal react-text: 167 , the Sioux tribe's lawsuit to appeal the approval of the pipeline project on Native American land is moving forward. “The Standing Rock Sioux Tribe is not backing down from this fight,”  /react-text says Dave Archambault II react-text: 169 , chairman of the Standing Rock Sioux Tribe. “We are guided by prayer, and we will continue to fight for our people. We will not rest until our lands, people, waters and sacred places are permanently protected from this destructive pipeline.” /react-text Broader Implications of the Pipeline react-text: 173 The controversy raised has broader implications about how the American government treats Native American people and grants permission to their land. “This permitting process for these major pipelines is too simple. It’s just a rubber stamp,”  /react-text says Archambault react-text: 175 . “We never felt we had a say.” According to  /react-text The Wall Street Journal react-text: 178 , the tribe believes government agencies should follow a stricter process requiring full environmental impact studies before beginning construction. The U.S. Department of Justice and Army Corps  /react-text said in a statement on Monday react-text: 180 , "We also look forward to a serious discussion during a series of consultations ... on whether there should be nationwide reform on the Tribal consultation process for these types of infrastructure projects.” /react-text Watch Shailene Woodley's full live stream of the protest here:Related: react-text: 186   /react-text Shailene Woodley Released From Jail After Protesting Dakota Access PipelineCheck this out: react-text: 306 ©  /react-text  react-text: 307 2018 /react-text  react-text: 308  Condé Nast. All rights reserved. Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our  /react-text User Agreement react-text: 310  (updated 5/25/18) and   /react-text Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement react-text: 312   (updated 5/25/18).  /react-text Teen Vogue  react-text: 314  may earn a portion of sales from products that are purchased through our site as part of our Affiliate Partnerships with retailers.  /react-text Your California Privacy Rights react-text: 316 .  The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the prior written permission of Condé Nast.  /react-text Ad Choices react-text: 318   /react-text CNWN Collection