Coastal GasLink pipeline fully installed: TC Energy. The Coastal GasLink pipeline, one of the largest energy infrastructure projects in recent Canadian history, is physically complete. TC Energy Corp., the company behind the project, said Monday it has finished installing pipe along the entire 670-km route from Dawson Creek, B.C. to Kitimat, B.C. — a milestone that marks the culmination of over five years of construction and 10 years of planning. The final weld was completed Oct. 7 at the base of Cable Crane Hill near Kitimat, TC Energy said. The company said mechanical completion of the pipeline, which involves final documentation, engineering analysis and testing, will be done before the end of the year. Monday's news was broadly hailed by the Canadian energy sector and industry watchers, who called it a significant step forward. The Coastal GasLink pipeline is one of two major pipelines — the second being the Trans Mountain oil pipeline — expected to come online in the coming months. Both are viewed by Canada's energy sector as potentially transformative, in terms of their ability to improve access to markets and to allow oil and gas companies to expand their production. The Coastal GasLink pipeline will transport natural gas from western Canada to the Shell-led LNG Canada processing and export facility currently being built in Kitimat — opening up new Asian markets for domestic natural gas drillers. "First of all, just getting a pipeline to tidewater is huge," said Heather Exner-Pirot, director of energy, natural resources and environment for the Macdonald-Laurier Institute. "I think the last time we did this was the 1950s. So this (pipeline completion) is just stunning to think of in itself, for Canada.". "But it also means we finally see some light at the end of the tunnel in terms of getting into the LNG (liquefied natural gas) game," she added. "We have just this incredible Montney reserve, this incredible reserve of natural gas, and now we can finally get some out to our own tidewater.". The LNG Canada facility, which will be the first liquefied natural gas export facility in Canada, is still under construction. But the company said in an update in July that the project is 85 per cent complete and on track to start shipping its first cargoes by mid-decade. LNG Canada, a more than $40-billion project, represents the single largest private investment in Canadian history. Until it and Coastal GasLink come online, Canadian gas producers wishing to export LNG have no choice but to ship their natural gas from Western Canada all the way to LNG facilities on the U.S. Gulf Coast. "There's no question, (the Coastal GasLink completion) is very positive. Market access has been a critical barrier," said Tristan Goodman, president of the Explorers and Producers Association of Canada, which represents more than 140 Canadian oil and gas companies. Goodman added that tapping into global LNG markets is critical for the future growth of the Canadian natural gas sector, which believes its product can be used as a cleaner-burning alternative to emissions-heavy coal in parts of Asia. "This (Coastal GasLink) is critical from a natural gas production standpoint. Depending on how you're looking at LNG growth, you could actually see a doubling of natural gas production (in Canada) in the coming years," he said. But the completion of the Coastal Gas pipeline has not been without challenges. What was initially expected to be a $6.2-billion capital project has run into significant budget overruns over the course of construction. Estimated project costs climbed first to $11.2 billion, and most recently to $14.5 billion, according to TC Energy's latest project price tag estimate as of February. Contributing to the increased costs have been unexpected construction issues, including problems with erosion and sediment control, and rising labour costs. TC Energy itself has been under significant scrutiny from investors and credit rating agencies for its heavy debt load as well as for the spiralling costs of Coastal GasLink. The project has also attracted opposition and protests from environmentalists and Indigenous leaders. While most Indigenous groups along the project's pathway support the pipeline, the hereditary Wet'suwet'en chiefs, whose territory the pipeline crosses, do not. In the winter of 2020, protesters blockaded freight and passenger rail services across the country to show solidarity with the Wet'suwet'en. However, over the course of the project, TC Energy also successfully signed agreements with 17 of the 20 Indigenous communities located along Coastal GasLink's route to acquire a 10 per cent equity stake in the project. Exner-Pirot said that kind of "groundbreaking" solution has essentially set the bar for Indigenous economic reconciliation in Canada when it comes to major resource project development going forward. "Obviously the Wet'suwet'en blockades became what people know about Coastal GasLink," she said. "But for Coastal GasLink to offer an equity option before the pipeline was built was some very creative financial work to get Indigenous communities a piece of the action. There probably is no better example in Canada, from any sector, of how to involve Indigenous communities.". Calgary Top Stories. BREAKING BREAKING | Catherine, Princess of Wales, diagnosed with cancer. BREAKING | Catherine, Princess of Wales, diagnosed with cancer. Charges laid in investigation into drone deliveries at Drumheller Institution. Charges laid in investigation into drone deliveries at Drumheller Institution. WEATHER WEATHER | Calgary got a month's worth of snow in 2 days, more expected this weekend. WEATHER | Calgary got a month's worth of snow in 2 days, more expected this weekend. 'He's got the rizz': 83-year-old Calgarian becomes viral TikTok sensation. 'He's got the rizz': 83-year-old Calgarian becomes viral TikTok sensation. Calgary-based organization works to improve access to clean drinking water. Calgary-based organization works to improve access to clean drinking water. WestJet Encore pilots hold information picket at Calgary International Airport. WestJet Encore pilots hold information picket at Calgary International Airport. Alberta set to fully reinstate gas tax of 13 cents a litre after drop in oil prices. Alberta set to fully reinstate gas tax of 13 cents a litre after drop in oil prices. Calgarians asked to turn off lights during spring migration. Calgarians asked to turn off lights during spring migration. CTVNews.ca Top Stories. BREAKING | Catherine, Princess of Wales, diagnosed with cancer. Catherine Middleton, Princess of Wales, has been diagnosed with cancer and is undergoing chemotherapy, she said in a video announcement on Friday. Read the full transcript of the Princess of Wales' statement. Catherine Middleton, Princess of Wales, has been diagnosed with cancer, she said Friday. Read the full transcript from her video statement. 40 dead, over 100 wounded after shooting in concert hall near Moscow. At least 40 people were killed and more than 100 injured when five gunmen dressed in camouflage opened fire with automatic weapons at people at a concert in the Crocus City Hall near Moscow. King Charles, political leaders offer support for Catherine, Princess of Wales, after cancer announcement. King Charles III, the U.K. prime minister and the White House offered support to Kate, Princess of Wales, after she said tests following abdominal surgery showed cancer had been present and she was undergoing preventative chemotherapy. As Catherine, Princess of Wales, announces her treatment for cancer, a look at recent events that have fuelled rumours. Before Catherine Middleton, Princess of Wales, announced her cancer diagnosis, distrust of the monarchy only intensified after she admitted that she edited an official family photo, and palace officials have struggled to regain control of the narrative as conjecture and conspiracy theories persist. One of B.C.'s most-wanted fugitives returned to Canada from Puerto Rico. More than two years after being arrested in Puerto Rico, one of B.C.'s most-wanted fugitives has been returned to Canada. Snowfall warnings of up to 50 cm: Here is the weekend forecast in Canada. Winter storm warnings and advisories of up to 50 centimetres of snowfall have been issued for some Canadian provinces, according to local forecasts. BREAKING | Woman critically injured in police-involved shooting in Ottawa's Westboro neighbourhood. A woman is in critical condition in hospital following a police-involved shooting in Ottawa's Westboro neighbourhood. Emergency crews responded to a shooting in the 200 block of Avondale Avenue, near Tweedsmuir Avenue, at 1:30 p.m. on Friday. Brampton, Ont., tax preparer gets jail for claiming $34 million in fake charitable donations: CRA. A Brampton, Ont., man has been sentenced to three years in jail after pleading guilty to falsely claiming $34 million worth of charitable donations on tax returns he prepared for clients. Shopping Trends. The Shopping Trends team is independent of the journalists at CTV News. We may earn a commission when you use our links to shop. Read about us. Editor's Picks Scotland's Top Outdoor Clothing Brand Just Arrived In Canada, And Here Are A Few Of Our Favourite Finds. Editor's Picks. Scotland's Top Outdoor Clothing Brand Just Arrived In Canada, And Here Are A Few Of Our Favourite Finds. There's A Total Solar Eclipse Coming Up In Canada, And Here’s How To Protect Your Eyes. There's A Total Solar Eclipse Coming Up In Canada, And Here’s How To Protect Your Eyes. Our Guide to the Best Body Pillows in Canada in 2024 (And Where to Get Them). Our Guide to the Best Body Pillows in Canada in 2024 (And Where to Get Them). Deals The Amazon Canada Big Spring Sale Has Officially Begun—Here Are 50+ Of The Best Deals. Deals. The Amazon Canada Big Spring Sale Has Officially Begun—Here Are 50+ Of The Best Deals. The Amazon Canada Big Spring Sale Is On: Here Are The Best Deals On Beauty Products. The Amazon Canada Big Spring Sale Is On: Here Are The Best Deals On Beauty Products. Run, Don't Walk: These Solar Eclipse Glasses Are On Sale Right Now. Run, Don't Walk: These Solar Eclipse Glasses Are On Sale Right Now. Home Our Guide to the Best Body Pillows in Canada in 2024 (And Where to Get Them). Home. Our Guide to the Best Body Pillows in Canada in 2024 (And Where to Get Them). 15 Travel Products That'll Make You A Pro At Packing. 15 Travel Products That'll Make You A Pro At Packing. Our Guide To The Best Electric Lawn Mowers In Canada In 2024 (And Where To Get Them). Our Guide To The Best Electric Lawn Mowers In Canada In 2024 (And Where To Get Them). Beauty 14 Foot Masks, Creams, And Other Pedicure Essentials That'll Help You Put Your Best Foot Forward. Beauty. 14 Foot Masks, Creams, And Other Pedicure Essentials That'll Help You Put Your Best Foot Forward. If You Want Your Dark Circles To Disappear, Add At Least One Of These Under-Eye Concealers To Your Cart. If You Want Your Dark Circles To Disappear, Add At Least One Of These Under-Eye Concealers To Your Cart. 10 Of The Best Vitamin C Serums You Can Get Online Right Now. 10 Of The Best Vitamin C Serums You Can Get Online Right Now. Edmonton. Signed Guns N' Roses guitar to be auctioned by Goodwill after donation by unknown donor Guns N' Roses fans will soon have the opportunity to buy a guitar believed to be signed by the band. Signed Guns N' Roses guitar to be auctioned by Goodwill after donation by unknown donor. Guns N' Roses fans will soon have the opportunity to buy a guitar believed to be signed by the band. Alberta set to fully reinstate gas tax of 13 cents a litre after drop in oil prices Gas prices are set to rise in Alberta next month, with the provincial government fully reinstating its fuel tax following a drop in oil prices. Alberta set to fully reinstate gas tax of 13 cents a litre after drop in oil prices. Gas prices are set to rise in Alberta next month, with the provincial government fully reinstating its fuel tax following a drop in oil prices. BREAKING BREAKING | Catherine, Princess of Wales, diagnosed with cancer Catherine Middleton, Princess of Wales, has been diagnosed with cancer and is undergoing chemotherapy, she said in a video announcement on Friday. BREAKING | Catherine, Princess of Wales, diagnosed with cancer. Catherine Middleton, Princess of Wales, has been diagnosed with cancer and is undergoing chemotherapy, she said in a video announcement on Friday. Lethbridge. Controversial MLA Chelsae Petrovic named parliamentary secretary by LaGrange Livingstone-Macleod MLA Chelsae Petrovic has been given a new post, but it’s causing some controversy. Controversial MLA Chelsae Petrovic named parliamentary secretary by LaGrange. Livingstone-Macleod MLA Chelsae Petrovic has been given a new post, but it’s causing some controversy. Lethbridge police step up efforts to disrupt cryptocurrency crime through proactive policing The Lethbridge Police Service is just one of multiple law enforcement agencies joining together as part of a proactive policing and disruption strategy to combat cryptocurrency crime. Lethbridge police step up efforts to disrupt cryptocurrency crime through proactive policing. The Lethbridge Police Service is just one of multiple law enforcement agencies joining together as part of a proactive policing and disruption strategy to combat cryptocurrency crime. Medicine Hat, Alta., mayor stripped of powers, pay following August incident at council Medicine Hat's mayor is essentially mayor in title only following a meeting of the southern Alberta city's council on Thursday. Medicine Hat, Alta., mayor stripped of powers, pay following August incident at council. Medicine Hat's mayor is essentially mayor in title only following a meeting of the southern Alberta city's council on Thursday. Vancouver. One of B.C.'s most-wanted fugitives returned to Canada from Puerto Rico More than two years after being arrested in Puerto Rico, one of B.C.'s most-wanted fugitives has been returned to Canada. One of B.C.'s most-wanted fugitives returned to Canada from Puerto Rico. More than two years after being arrested in Puerto Rico, one of B.C.'s most-wanted fugitives has been returned to Canada. 'I'm just a regular guy': Meet the B.C. man who just won $58M playing Lotto 6/49 The winner of an enormous $58-million Lotto 6/49 jackpot emerged Friday to collect his prize, describing himself as 'regular guy' from B.C.'s Lower Mainland. 'I'm just a regular guy': Meet the B.C. man who just won $58M playing Lotto 6/49. The winner of an enormous $58-million Lotto 6/49 jackpot emerged Friday to collect his prize, describing himself as 'regular guy' from B.C.'s Lower Mainland. BREAKING BREAKING | Catherine, Princess of Wales, diagnosed with cancer Catherine Middleton, Princess of Wales, has been diagnosed with cancer and is undergoing chemotherapy, she said in a video announcement on Friday. BREAKING | Catherine, Princess of Wales, diagnosed with cancer. Catherine Middleton, Princess of Wales, has been diagnosed with cancer and is undergoing chemotherapy, she said in a video announcement on Friday. Vancouver Island. Pair arrested after separate crashes, assault with a weapon near Victoria Mounties arrested a man and a woman on Vancouver Island after a pair of motor vehicle crashes and a reported assault on a security guard early Friday morning. Pair arrested after separate crashes, assault with a weapon near Victoria. Mounties arrested a man and a woman on Vancouver Island after a pair of motor vehicle crashes and a reported assault on a security guard early Friday morning. BREAKING BREAKING | Catherine, Princess of Wales, diagnosed with cancer Catherine Middleton, Princess of Wales, has been diagnosed with cancer and is undergoing chemotherapy, she said in a video announcement on Friday. BREAKING | Catherine, Princess of Wales, diagnosed with cancer. Catherine Middleton, Princess of Wales, has been diagnosed with cancer and is undergoing chemotherapy, she said in a video announcement on Friday. 'Like a hot iron.' B.C. man's ultra-marathon Hawaiian swim is scuttled by jellyfish Ultra-endurance athlete Nick Pelletier knew the Hawaiian channel he planned to swim had plenty of sharks, but he should have been worried about the jellyfish. 'Like a hot iron.' B.C. man's ultra-marathon Hawaiian swim is scuttled by jellyfish. Ultra-endurance athlete Nick Pelletier knew the Hawaiian channel he planned to swim had plenty of sharks, but he should have been worried about the jellyfish. Saskatoon. Sask. teachers to pause extracurriculars for full week heading into Easter break Saskatchewan teachers' job action will continue next week with a provincewide four day pause of extracurricular activities heading into the Easter break for students. Sask. teachers to pause extracurriculars for full week heading into Easter break. Saskatchewan teachers' job action will continue next week with a provincewide four day pause of extracurricular activities heading into the Easter break for students. Here are some of Sask.'s 'strangest' insurance fraud attempts From a fake jewelry scam to intentionally vandalizing a vehicle, Saskatchewan Government Insurance (SGI) is sharing its top five quirky insurance fraud cases of the past year. Here are some of Sask.'s 'strangest' insurance fraud attempts. From a fake jewelry scam to intentionally vandalizing a vehicle, Saskatchewan Government Insurance (SGI) is sharing its top five quirky insurance fraud cases of the past year. Police warn of speeding ticket text scam circulating in Saskatoon The Saskatoon Police Service (SPS) is warning residents about a text scam circulating telling people they need to pay a speeding fine. Police warn of speeding ticket text scam circulating in Saskatoon. The Saskatoon Police Service (SPS) is warning residents about a text scam circulating telling people they need to pay a speeding fine. Regina. Sask. teachers to pause extracurriculars for full week heading into Easter break Saskatchewan teachers' job action will continue next week with a provincewide four day pause of extracurricular activities heading into the Easter break for students. Sask. teachers to pause extracurriculars for full week heading into Easter break. Saskatchewan teachers' job action will continue next week with a provincewide four day pause of extracurricular activities heading into the Easter break for students. U of R Rams' Sombach and Mimbs hoping to impress at CFL Combine Athletes are busy getting a dose of the Canadian Football League lifestyle at the CFL Combine this week in Winnipeg. U of R Rams' Sombach and Mimbs hoping to impress at CFL Combine. Athletes are busy getting a dose of the Canadian Football League lifestyle at the CFL Combine this week in Winnipeg. Here are some of Sask.'s 'strangest' insurance fraud attempts From a fake jewelry scam to intentionally vandalizing a vehicle, Saskatchewan Government Insurance (SGI) is sharing its top five quirky insurance fraud cases of the past year. Here are some of Sask.'s 'strangest' insurance fraud attempts. From a fake jewelry scam to intentionally vandalizing a vehicle, Saskatchewan Government Insurance (SGI) is sharing its top five quirky insurance fraud cases of the past year. Toronto. More than $55M has been lost to investment scams in Toronto over the last 9 months. Is 'pig butchering' making it worse? Since the spring of 2023, more than $57 million has been reported stolen from Toronto residents in investment scams. Is the new variation, 'pig butchering,' making the problem worse? More than $55M has been lost to investment scams in Toronto over the last 9 months. Is 'pig butchering' making it worse? Since the spring of 2023, more than $57 million has been reported stolen from Toronto residents in investment scams. Is the new variation, 'pig butchering,' making the problem worse? LIVE UPDATES: Toronto hit with spring snowstorm, up to 15 cm expected Toronto is being hit by a spring snowstorm that’s expected to drop as much as 15 centimetres of snow on some parts of the city by Friday night. LIVE UPDATES: Toronto hit with spring snowstorm, up to 15 cm expected. Toronto is being hit by a spring snowstorm that’s expected to drop as much as 15 centimetres of snow on some parts of the city by Friday night. 18 confirmed salmonella cases linked to geckos reported in Ontario Ontario has 18 confirmed cases of salmonella infections linked to exposure to geckos, the federal public health agency says. 18 confirmed salmonella cases linked to geckos reported in Ontario. Ontario has 18 confirmed cases of salmonella infections linked to exposure to geckos, the federal public health agency says. Montreal. Cree community grieving after five people killed in collision in rural Quebec The Cree community of Waswanipi, Que., is in mourning after five people died in a collision between a pickup truck and a van in the rural town of Chapais on Thursday. Cree community grieving after five people killed in collision in rural Quebec. The Cree community of Waswanipi, Que., is in mourning after five people died in a collision between a pickup truck and a van in the rural town of Chapais on Thursday. Police in Ontario, Quebec arrest 34 people in connection to auto thefts in 'Project Volcano' Police in Ontario and Quebec arrested 34 suspects in a "major interprovincial operation" to address auto theft in Ontario. Ontario Provincial Police worked with the Sûreté du Québec and Montreal police as part of 'Project Volcano.'. Police in Ontario, Quebec arrest 34 people in connection to auto thefts in 'Project Volcano'. Police in Ontario and Quebec arrested 34 suspects in a "major interprovincial operation" to address auto theft in Ontario. Ontario Provincial Police worked with the Sûreté du Québec and Montreal police as part of 'Project Volcano.'. Montreal's forecast for the first weekend of spring: snow While winter tires are no longer mandatory in Quebec, you might want to think twice about removing them. Montreal's forecast for the first weekend of spring: snow. While winter tires are no longer mandatory in Quebec, you might want to think twice about removing them. Atlantic. More than 30 cm of spring snow expected for parts of the Maritimes this weekend CTV Atlantic meteorologist Kalin Mitchell shares the latest information on spring snow expected for parts of the Maritimes this weekend. More than 30 cm of spring snow expected for parts of the Maritimes this weekend. CTV Atlantic meteorologist Kalin Mitchell shares the latest information on spring snow expected for parts of the Maritimes this weekend. BREAKING BREAKING | Catherine, Princess of Wales, diagnosed with cancer Catherine Middleton, Princess of Wales, has been diagnosed with cancer and is undergoing chemotherapy, she said in a video announcement on Friday. BREAKING | Catherine, Princess of Wales, diagnosed with cancer. Catherine Middleton, Princess of Wales, has been diagnosed with cancer and is undergoing chemotherapy, she said in a video announcement on Friday. Nova Scotia strikes deal for renovated health facility with private company The Nova Scotia government is turning over to a private company a project to convert an unfinished hotel into a facility for patients who no longer need hospital care. Nova Scotia strikes deal for renovated health facility with private company. The Nova Scotia government is turning over to a private company a project to convert an unfinished hotel into a facility for patients who no longer need hospital care. Winnipeg. LIVE AT 3 PM LIVE AT 3 PM | Families of slain women to meet with governments, provide update on Manitoba landfill search The families of two slain First Nations women are expected to provide an update Friday afternoon in their push to get governments to fund a search of a Winnipeg-area landfill for the women's remains. LIVE AT 3 PM | Families of slain women to meet with governments, provide update on Manitoba landfill search. The families of two slain First Nations women are expected to provide an update Friday afternoon in their push to get governments to fund a search of a Winnipeg-area landfill for the women's remains. Manitoba projects deficit close to $2B, government launches health-care audits The Manitoba government issued a new, higher deficit projection Friday and announced financial audits of health authorities to crack down on what it called overspending. Manitoba projects deficit close to $2B, government launches health-care audits. The Manitoba government issued a new, higher deficit projection Friday and announced financial audits of health authorities to crack down on what it called overspending. Berens River RCMP lay charges over shooting incidents A Berens River resident has been charged in connection with two shooting incidents. Berens River RCMP lay charges over shooting incidents. A Berens River resident has been charged in connection with two shooting incidents. Ottawa. BREAKING BREAKING | Woman critically injured in police-involved shooting in Ottawa's Westboro neighbourhood A woman is in critical condition in hospital following a police-involved shooting in Ottawa's Westboro neighbourhood. Emergency crews responded to a shooting in the 200 block of Avondale Avenue, near Tweedsmuir Avenue, at 1:30 p.m. on Friday. BREAKING | Woman critically injured in police-involved shooting in Ottawa's Westboro neighbourhood. A woman is in critical condition in hospital following a police-involved shooting in Ottawa's Westboro neighbourhood. Emergency crews responded to a shooting in the 200 block of Avondale Avenue, near Tweedsmuir Avenue, at 1:30 p.m. on Friday. BREAKING BREAKING | Catherine, Princess of Wales, diagnosed with cancer Catherine Middleton, Princess of Wales, has been diagnosed with cancer and is undergoing chemotherapy, she said in a video announcement on Friday. BREAKING | Catherine, Princess of Wales, diagnosed with cancer. Catherine Middleton, Princess of Wales, has been diagnosed with cancer and is undergoing chemotherapy, she said in a video announcement on Friday. Police in Ontario, Quebec arrest 34 people in connection to auto thefts in 'Project Volcano' Police in Ontario and Quebec arrested 34 suspects in a "major interprovincial operation" to address auto theft in Ontario. Ontario Provincial Police worked with the Sûreté du Québec and Montreal police as part of 'Project Volcano.'. Police in Ontario, Quebec arrest 34 people in connection to auto thefts in 'Project Volcano'. Police in Ontario and Quebec arrested 34 suspects in a "major interprovincial operation" to address auto theft in Ontario. Ontario Provincial Police worked with the Sûreté du Québec and Montreal police as part of 'Project Volcano.'. Northern Ontario. BREAKING BREAKING | Catherine, Princess of Wales, diagnosed with cancer Catherine Middleton, Princess of Wales, has been diagnosed with cancer and is undergoing chemotherapy, she said in a video announcement on Friday. BREAKING | Catherine, Princess of Wales, diagnosed with cancer. Catherine Middleton, Princess of Wales, has been diagnosed with cancer and is undergoing chemotherapy, she said in a video announcement on Friday. Blueberries, strawberries again on the 'Dirty Dozen' list Approximately 95 per cent of nonorganic strawberries, leafy greens such as spinach and kale, collard and mustard greens, grapes, peaches and pears tested contained detectable levels of pesticides, according to the 2024 Shopper’s Guide to Pesticides in Produce. Blueberries, strawberries again on the 'Dirty Dozen' list. Approximately 95 per cent of nonorganic strawberries, leafy greens such as spinach and kale, collard and mustard greens, grapes, peaches and pears tested contained detectable levels of pesticides, according to the 2024 Shopper’s Guide to Pesticides in Produce. Joseph George Sutherland, convicted of killing 2 women in Toronto in the 80s, set to be sentenced today The man who confessed to the brutal 1983 murders of two women in Toronto after evading police for decades is set to be sentenced on Friday afternoon. Joseph George Sutherland, convicted of killing 2 women in Toronto in the 80s, set to be sentenced today. The man who confessed to the brutal 1983 murders of two women in Toronto after evading police for decades is set to be sentenced on Friday afternoon. Barrie. Dump truck driver found guilty in deadly crash The driver of a dump truck that crashed along Quarry Road in Severn Township three years ago has been found guilty of dangerous driving causing death. Dump truck driver found guilty in deadly crash. The driver of a dump truck that crashed along Quarry Road in Severn Township three years ago has been found guilty of dangerous driving causing death. Ontario invests more than $9.8 million to primary care teams across 3 major regions The Ontario government is investing more than $9.8 million to connect up to 34,000 people to primary care teams across the Simcoe, Bruce, and York regions. Ontario invests more than $9.8 million to primary care teams across 3 major regions. The Ontario government is investing more than $9.8 million to connect up to 34,000 people to primary care teams across the Simcoe, Bruce, and York regions. Suspect wanted for armed robbery in Penetanguishene Provincial police hope to identify the man involved in an armed robbery at a convenience store in Penetanguishene early Thursday morning. Suspect wanted for armed robbery in Penetanguishene. Provincial police hope to identify the man involved in an armed robbery at a convenience store in Penetanguishene early Thursday morning. Kitchener. Police arrest youth near Kitchener high school, gun located A male youth is now in police custody after officers were called to a Kitchener high school for a weapons investigation. Police arrest youth near Kitchener high school, gun located. A male youth is now in police custody after officers were called to a Kitchener high school for a weapons investigation. Pickup truck stolen in Guelph found in Italy A pickup truck that was stolen in Guelph more than a year ago has been found in Italy. Pickup truck stolen in Guelph found in Italy. A pickup truck that was stolen in Guelph more than a year ago has been found in Italy. How a machine developed in Elmira, Ont. is revolutionizing aerosol recycling An innovative recycling machine developed in Elmira 25 years ago is being recognized on the international stage. How a machine developed in Elmira, Ont. is revolutionizing aerosol recycling. An innovative recycling machine developed in Elmira 25 years ago is being recognized on the international stage. London. Several multi-vehicle collisions close sections of Highway 401, OPP say A section of Highway 401 eastbound near Rodney, Ont. is closed early Friday afternoon following a multi-vehicle collision. Several multi-vehicle collisions close sections of Highway 401, OPP say. A section of Highway 401 eastbound near Rodney, Ont. is closed early Friday afternoon following a multi-vehicle collision. BREAKING BREAKING | Catherine, Princess of Wales, diagnosed with cancer Catherine Middleton, Princess of Wales, has been diagnosed with cancer and is undergoing chemotherapy, she said in a video announcement on Friday. BREAKING | Catherine, Princess of Wales, diagnosed with cancer. Catherine Middleton, Princess of Wales, has been diagnosed with cancer and is undergoing chemotherapy, she said in a video announcement on Friday. 'I grew up here': Fire destroys the heart of century farm in North Middlesex The loss of a century-old barn is being mourned by a couple in North Middlesex. 'I grew up here, and it just breaks my heart to know that it is gone,' said a tearful Kim Beierling. 'I grew up here': Fire destroys the heart of century farm in North Middlesex. The loss of a century-old barn is being mourned by a couple in North Middlesex. 'I grew up here, and it just breaks my heart to know that it is gone,' said a tearful Kim Beierling. Windsor. Multiple shots fired at a home on Howard Avenue Windsor police officers are investigating after multiple shots were fired at a residence on Howard Avenue. Multiple shots fired at a home on Howard Avenue. Windsor police officers are investigating after multiple shots were fired at a residence on Howard Avenue. He’s B-A-C-K: Spelling star Isaac Brogan returns for regional bee While many Canadian kids channel their competitive spirit on the ice, 12-year-old Isaac Brogan has made a name for himself in the spelling bee circuit. He’s B-A-C-K: Spelling star Isaac Brogan returns for regional bee. While many Canadian kids channel their competitive spirit on the ice, 12-year-old Isaac Brogan has made a name for himself in the spelling bee circuit. BREAKING BREAKING | Catherine, Princess of Wales, diagnosed with cancer Catherine Middleton, Princess of Wales, has been diagnosed with cancer and is undergoing chemotherapy, she said in a video announcement on Friday. BREAKING | Catherine, Princess of Wales, diagnosed with cancer. Catherine Middleton, Princess of Wales, has been diagnosed with cancer and is undergoing chemotherapy, she said in a video announcement on Friday. Stay Connected. 