Coastal GasLink Pipeline Project, British Columbia. Project Type. Location. Start of Construction. Investment. Operator. Coastal GasLink Pipeline is a proposed natural gas pipeline to be constructed by TransCanada Pipelines from Groundbirch area near Dawson Creek, to the proposed LNG Canada facility on the west coast of British Columbia near Kitimat. The $4bn project will supply natural gas to Shell Energy’s proposed LNG Canada facility according to an agreement signed between Shell and TransCanada. Construction on the pipeline project is expected to start in 2016 with operations scheduled to commence in 2018. The pipeline is estimated to have a life of up to 30 years. Coastal GasLink Pipeline Project construction. The project will include the construction of a 670km-long, 48in-diameter pipeline to provide between two and three billion cubic feet a day (bcf/d) of natural gas that can be expanded to 5bcf/d through the addition of up to seven compressor stations, while a single compressor station will be built initially. The project is planned to be built with top quality steel pipelines and welding techniques to maintain and protect against corrosion. All welds will be checked by an X-ray or ultrasound process during the construction. The pipeline will be coated externally and cathodic protection measures will be utilised to maintain the integrity of the pipe and the coating. Compressor and meter station details. The compressor station for the Coastal GasLink pipeline will be located in the Groundbirch area. It will include two 30MW natural gas-fired turbo-compressor packages. Other auxiliary equipments to be installed at the compressor station include discharge gas coolers, high-pressure yard piping, isolation valves, electrical, control and telecommunication systems, storage facilities, and offices. Three meter stations will be built near Groundbirch and Vanderhoof and at the pipeline’s termination point at the proposed LNG Canada facility. The meter stations construction is expected to be completed in five months. Coastal GasLink Pipeline project timeline. The project was announced in June 2012, and began an engagement programme with aboriginal communities, local government, landowners and stakeholders. Environmental and engineering studies were conducted along the pipeline corridor from between 2013 and 2014. The British Columbia Environmental Assessment Office (EAO) issued an environmental assessment certificate for the project in October 2014. Benefits of TransCanada’s natural gas pipeline. The project is expected to create between 2,000 and 2,500 jobs during construction and between 16 and 35 permanent jobs during operations. It will also improve the local economy by employing local goods and services such as food, accommodation, hardware, fuel, parts and equipment. Free download worth over $5000Download our 2019 Technology, Media and Telecoms Predictions Report. In this report, we look at the 30 big tech themes for 2019, identifying winners and losers for each theme. This report will impact all industries helping:. CEOs/Senior Staff: in all industries understand the disruptive threats to their competitive landscape. Investors: Helps fund managers focus their time on the most interesting investment opportunities in global TM. Companies Involved. Learn more. Hover over the logos to learn more about the companies who made this project possible. Swissfluid Swissfluid WhitePapers Press Releases Regional Offices Video Follow Make an Enquiry Swissfluid WhitePapers Regional Offices Message company. Swissfluid. Make an Enquiry. Global Analyser Solutions Global Analyser Solutions WhitePapers Press Releases Regional Offices Video Follow Make an Enquiry Global Analyser Solutions WhitePapers Regional Offices Message company. Global Analyser Solutions. Make an Enquiry. CEPS CEPS provides a comprehensive portfolio of pipeline services and pipeline... CEPS About CEPS provides a comprehensive portfolio of pipeline services and pipeline integrity services needed during pre-commissioning, commissioning, putting in operation, decommissioning, shut-down, repair and rehabilitation as well as pipeline abandonment works. Products Hydrostatic Testing and Pipeline Drying CEPS provides turnkey commissioning services including engineering studies and/or specification development, pipeline cleaning and gauging, chemical treatment of test water, and much more. Pigging Services – Mechanical and Chemical Pipeline Cleaning and Gauging We provide mechanical pipeline cleaning and gauging, chemical cleaning with oil and water soluble reagents, application of corrosion inhibitors on internal pipeline surface, and more. WhitePapers Press Releases Regional Offices Video Follow Make an Enquiry CEPS CEPS provides a comprehensive portfolio of pipeline services and pipeline integrity services needed during pre-commissioning, commissioning, putting in operation, decommissioning, shut-down, repair and rehabilitation as well as pipeline abandonment works. WhitePapers Regional Offices Message company. CEPS. CEPS provides a comprehensive portfolio of pipeline services and pipeline... About. CEPS provides a comprehensive portfolio of pipeline services and pipeline integrity services needed during pre-commissioning, commissioning, putting in operation, decommissioning, shut-down, repair and rehabilitation as well as pipeline abandonment works. Products. Hydrostatic Testing and Pipeline Drying. CEPS provides turnkey commissioning services including engineering studies and/or specification development, pipeline cleaning and gauging, chemical treatment of test water, and much more. Pigging Services – Mechanical and Chemical Pipeline Cleaning and Gauging. We provide mechanical pipeline cleaning and gauging, chemical cleaning with oil and water soluble reagents, application of corrosion inhibitors on internal pipeline surface, and more. Make an Enquiry. CEPS provides a comprehensive portfolio of pipeline services and pipeline integrity services needed during pre-commissioning, commissioning, putting in operation, decommissioning, shut-down, repair and rehabilitation as well as pipeline abandonment works. Your recommended content. Why we believe workplace health and wellness is important. Download a free 10 page preview of our Mergers & Acquisitions in TMT – Thematic Research 2019 Report. Accelerating Clinical Trials: Your recommended content. Clinical Trial Continuity in Asia-Pacific during the COVID-19 pandemic. Future of Mining: Your recommended content. A sneak peek into Canada’s largest transit expansion. Precision medical wire: Your recommended content. Precision wire for vascular therapy: How EXERA® rises to the challenge. 