Business & Human Rights Resource Centre. Show all languages. 20 YEARS OF. Business & Human Rights Resource Centre. Show all languages. 2 Jan 2020. B.C.’s Supreme court rules for $6.6-billion Coastal GasLink pipeline, against Indigenous law. The Supreme Court of British Columbia has ruled that Indigenous law is not necessarily Canadian law in a decision that will enable more construction work on the $6.6-billion Coastal GasLink pipeline despite some First Nations opposition... B.C. Supreme Court Justice Marguerite Church ruled Tuesday that Coastal GasLink has suffered irreparable harm after protestors built blockades and camps to stop work crews from accessing parts of the natural gas pipeline route. Church granted both an interlocutory injunction and an enforcement order, which will “provide a mandate to the RCMP to enforce the terms of the order.”. ... In this case, Coastal GasLink has signed agreements with elected First Nations groups along the pipeline route, but a group of Wet’suwet’en hereditary chiefs have said they oppose the project and tried to use First Nations law to prevent the company from building the pipeline... “There has been no process by which Wet’suwet’en customary laws have been recognized in this manner,” the judge wrote. “While Wet’suwet’en customary laws clearly exist on their own independent footing, they are not recognized as being an effectual part of Canadian law.” However, the overlap between Canadian law and Indigenous law has not been completely settled and courts across the country have had different opinions on the topic, said Dwight Newman, a law professor at the University of Saskatchewan and the Canada Research Chair in Indigenous Rights and Constitutional Law... Coastal GasLink and some of the opposed hereditary chiefs came to an agreement on a protocol for accessing the area in April 2019, but some protestors have continued to impede work at the site. Timeline. Mitsubishi Corporation response to RCMP arrest of five land defenders Date: 14 Dec 2023 Content Type: Company Response. Mitsubishi Corporation response to RCMP arrest of five land defenders. Cedar LNG did not respond to RCMP arrest of five land defenders Date: 14 Dec 2023 Content Type: Company Response. Cedar LNG did not respond to RCMP arrest of five land defenders. PetroChina did not respond to RCMP arrest of five land defenders Date: 14 Dec 2023 Content Type: Company Response. PetroChina did not respond to RCMP arrest of five land defenders. Petronas did not respond to RCMP arrest of five land defenders Date: 14 Dec 2023 Content Type: Company Response. Petronas did not respond to RCMP arrest of five land defenders. TC Energy response to RCMP arrest of five land defenders Date: 14 Dec 2023 Content Type: Company Response. TC Energy response to RCMP arrest of five land defenders. Shell response to RCMP arrest of five land defenders Date: 12 Dec 2023 Content Type: Company Response. Shell response to RCMP arrest of five land defenders. LNG Canada response to RCMP arrest of five land defenders Date: 11 Dec 2023 Content Type: Company Response. LNG Canada response to RCMP arrest of five land defenders. Korea Gas Corporation (KOGAS) response to RCMP arrest of five land defenders Date: 7 Dec 2023 Content Type: Company Response. Korea Gas Corporation (KOGAS) response to RCMP arrest of five land defenders. Canada: Five land defenders arrested after Coastal GasLink security worker complaint Date: 30 Mar 2023 Content Type: Article. Canada: Five land defenders arrested after Coastal GasLink security worker complaint. Canada: Wet’suwet’en leaders warn of surveillance & heavy police presence to facilitate Coastal GasLink drilling under river; incl. co. comment Date: 26 Sep 2022 Content Type: Article. Canada: Wet’suwet’en leaders warn of surveillance & heavy police presence to facilitate Coastal GasLink drilling under river; incl. co. comment. Celebrities call for Royal Bank to stop financing Coastal GasLink pipeline; co. declined comment Date: 24 Mar 2022 Content Type: Article. Celebrities call for Royal Bank to stop financing Coastal GasLink pipeline; co. declined comment. Wet’suwet’en land defenders call on United Nations to visit proposed pipeline Date: 14 Feb 2022 Content Type: Article. Wet’suwet’en land defenders call on United Nations to visit proposed pipeline. Canada: Indigenous land defenders continue to oppose Coastal GasLink pipeline despite violent arrests; incl. co. comment Date: 27 Jan 2022 Content Type: Article First proposed in 2012, the 670-kilometre Coastal GasLink (CGL) pipeline is set to pass through the Wet’suwet’en Nation. Wet’suwet’en hereditary chiefs from the nation’s five clans and 13 houses oppose the multi-billion dollar pipeline and say they were not consulted before its approval. Canada: Indigenous land defenders continue to oppose Coastal GasLink pipeline despite violent arrests; incl. co. comment. First proposed in 2012, the 670-kilometre Coastal GasLink (CGL) pipeline is set to pass through the Wet’suwet’en Nation. Wet’suwet’en hereditary chiefs from the nation’s five clans and 13 houses oppose the multi-billion dollar pipeline and say they were not consulted before its approval. Canada: Charges dropped against 22 Wet’suwet’en land defenders arrested for protesting Coastal GasLink pipeline Date: 10 Jun 2020 Content Type: Article. Canada: Charges dropped against 22 Wet’suwet’en land defenders arrested for protesting Coastal GasLink pipeline. Coronavirus forces Wet’suwet’en to explore online talks on rights & title agreement Date: 20 Mar 2020 Content Type: Article. Coronavirus forces Wet’suwet’en to explore online talks on rights & title agreement. Committee to Protect Journalists expresses concern regarding treatment of journalists covering protests against a pipeline in Wet’suwet’en territory Date: 20 Mar 2020 Content Type: Article. Committee to Protect Journalists expresses concern regarding treatment of journalists covering protests against a pipeline in Wet’suwet’en territory. Canada: Wet’suwet’en and ministers agree tentative deal in land dispute Date: 2 Mar 2020 Content Type: Article. Canada: Wet’suwet’en and ministers agree tentative deal in land dispute. What you need to know about the Coastal GasLink pipeline conflict Date: 11 Feb 2020 Content Type: Article. What you need to know about the Coastal GasLink pipeline conflict. Protesters arrested as they block ports & railways in support of Wetʼsuwetʼen Date: 10 Feb 2020 Content Type: Article. Protesters arrested as they block ports & railways in support of Wetʼsuwetʼen. Assembly of First Nations National Chief Statement on Situation in Wet'suwet'en Territory Date: 7 Feb 2020 Content Type: Article. Assembly of First Nations National Chief Statement on Situation in Wet'suwet'en Territory. Several indigenous land defenders arrested at Wet'suwet'en anti-pipeline camp as RCMP move in to enforce injunction Date: 6 Feb 2020 Content Type: Article. Several indigenous land defenders arrested at Wet'suwet'en anti-pipeline camp as RCMP move in to enforce injunction. Open letter from David Pfeiffer, Coastal GasLink President Date: 6 Feb 2020 Content Type: Article. Open letter from David Pfeiffer, Coastal GasLink President. RCMP are raiding Wet’suwet’en land defender camps Date: 6 Feb 2020 Content Type: Article. RCMP are raiding Wet’suwet’en land defender camps. Commentary: Canada, the RCMP, and Human Rights Obligations to the Wet'suwet'en Nation Date: 11 Jan 2020 Content Type: Article. Commentary: Canada, the RCMP, and Human Rights Obligations to the Wet'suwet'en Nation. B.C. human rights commissioner asks Canadian government to halt pipeline project Date: 11 Jan 2020 Content Type: Article. B.C. human rights commissioner asks Canadian government to halt pipeline project. Wet’suwet’en Hereditary Chiefs reject the BC Supreme Court decision to criminalize Wet’suwet’en law Date: 2 Jan 2020 Content Type: Article. Wet’suwet’en Hereditary Chiefs reject the BC Supreme Court decision to criminalize Wet’suwet’en law. B.C.’s Supreme court rules for $6.6-billion Coastal GasLink pipeline, against Indigenous law Date: 2 Jan 2020 Content Type: Article. B.C.’s Supreme court rules for $6.6-billion Coastal GasLink pipeline, against Indigenous law. Coastal GasLink comments on injunction decision Date: 31 Dec 2019 Content Type: Article. Coastal GasLink comments on injunction decision. Canadian police were prepared to shoot indigenous activists blocking construction of natural gas pipeline Date: 30 Dec 2019 Content Type: Article. Canadian police were prepared to shoot indigenous activists blocking construction of natural gas pipeline. Deal reached between Wet'suwet'en hereditary chiefs & RCMP over road access for pipeline company Date: 11 Jan 2019 Content Type: Article. Deal reached between Wet'suwet'en hereditary chiefs & RCMP over road access for pipeline company. Coastal GasLink pipeline could face federal regulatory review Date: 10 Jan 2019 Content Type: Article. Coastal GasLink pipeline could face federal regulatory review. Statement from Unist'ot'en camp Date: 10 Jan 2019 Content Type: Article. Statement from Unist'ot'en camp. 14 Indigenous activists arrested in Canadian pipeline standoff Date: 9 Jan 2019 Content Type: Article. 14 Indigenous activists arrested in Canadian pipeline standoff. Canada: indigenous anti-pipeline protesters call police presence ‘act of war’ Date: 7 Jan 2019 Content Type: Article. Canada: indigenous anti-pipeline protesters call police presence ‘act of war’. UBCIC condemns RCMP intimidation of Wet’suwet’en land defenders Date: 6 Jan 2019 Content Type: Article. UBCIC condemns RCMP intimidation of Wet’suwet’en land defenders. 