https://context.capp.ca/energy-matters/2022/first-nations-take-ownership-stake-in-coastal-gaslink-pipeline/

First Nations take ownership stake in Coastal GasLink pipeline. Sixteen Indigenous communities make historic investment to become equity partners in vital B.C. natural gas pipeline needed for LNG exports. By Holly Quan. Indigenous communities along the route of the Coastal GasLink pipeline have signed agreements with TC Energy (the builder of the pipeline) to acquire a 10 per cent equity stake in the project. The agreement includes 16 of 20 Indigenous communities along the pipeline route. The elected band councils of those 20 communities have already expressed support for the project, which brings sustainable jobs and economic growth to northern B.C. These communities also have other business partnerships with the project including supply chain contracts as well as benefits agreements to build thriving communities through investments in cultural, sports, health and education programs and infrastructure. Read more: Coastal GasLink supports economic recovery in B.C. The communities are represented by two groups, the CGL First Nations Limited Partnership and the FN CGL Pipeline Limited Partnership. “For many of us, this marks the first time that our Nations have been included as owners in a major natural resource project that is crossing our territories,” said Chief Corrina Leween of the Cheslatta Carrier Nation, adding, “This is a historic milestone.”. Read more: Indigenous partnership builds wilderness lodge for workers. Chief Justin Napoleon of the Saulteau First Nations said, “This investment in Coastal GasLink will finally start to shift the landscape, aligning industry and Indigenous peoples’ interests over the entire life cycle of a project.”. Bevin Wirzba, president of Coastal GasLink, added, “We recognize that enduring relationships need to include long-term economic opportunities that support the resiliency of Indigenous communities.”. Read more: Resource development a pathway for Indigenous self-determination. The equity options can be executed once the pipeline begins service, subject to customary regulatory approval. Revenues from the equity agreements would allow communities to fund roads, housing, schools and community facilities and service. Article. Environment and Sustainability. In the News. Industry Competitiveness. LNG. Natural Gas. Other Articles That May Interest You. Project Reconciliation would use revenue from Trans Mountain pipeline equity to build long-term stability and fund other energy transition and infrastructure projects. Community Relations. Economic Benefits. In the News. Indigenous Engagement. Federal government announces support to enable Indigenous participation in natural gas and oil projects, leading to sustainable community prosperity. Community Relations. Economic Benefits. In the News. Indigenous Engagement. Series of articles examines what meaningful consultation and economic reconciliation look like. Canada. Community Relations. Economic Benefits. Editors Pick. Indigenous Engagement. Natural Gas. oil. Clean Canadian liquefied natural gas (LNG) to be exported to Asian markets. Environment and Sustainability. Innovation. Edmonton Journal article highlights how court decision represents a win for First Nations who see resource development as path to economic reconciliation. Community Relations. Economic Benefits. Editors Pick. Indigenous Engagement. Industry Competitiveness. oil. 
