https://nationalpost.com/opinion/opinion-we-are-wetsuweten-but-the-coastal-gaslink-pipeline-protesters-dont-represent-us

Opinion: We are Wet'suwet'en and the Coastal GasLink pipeline protesters do not represent us. We want the protesters to cease their blockades and stop misleading people. You can save this article by registering for free here. Or sign-in if you have an account. Article content. The following was authored by members of the Gidimt’en Clan and released by Wet’suwet’en First Nation council at their request. We are members of the Gidimt’en Clan of the Wet’suwet’en Nation, together with extended family members from other Wet’suwet’en house groups and communities, both on- and off-reserve. Our clan territories include the area where the Coastal GasLink pipeline crosses the river we call Wedzin Kwa. We are deeply hurt and angered by the conduct and statements of some of our community members and others who claim to be defending our lands and laws against the pipeline. Enjoy the latest local, national and international news. Exclusive articles by Conrad Black, Barbara Kay, Rex Murphy and others. Plus, special edition NP Platformed and First Reading newsletters and virtual events. Unlimited online access to National Post and 15 news sites with one account. National Post ePaper, an electronic replica of the print edition to view on any device, share and comment on. Daily puzzles including the New York Times Crossword. Support local journalism. Enjoy the latest local, national and international news. Exclusive articles by Conrad Black, Barbara Kay, Rex Murphy and others. Plus, special edition NP Platformed and First Reading newsletters and virtual events. Unlimited online access to National Post and 15 news sites with one account. National Post ePaper, an electronic replica of the print edition to view on any device, share and comment on. Daily puzzles including the New York Times Crossword. Support local journalism. Create an account or sign in to continue with your reading experience. Access articles from across Canada with one account. Share your thoughts and join the conversation in the comments. Enjoy additional articles per month. Get email updates from your favourite authors. Don't have an account? Create Account. Our concerns are not about the pipeline itself. Some of us support it, some of us do not and some are neutral. Our issue is that our traditions and way of life are being misrepresented and dishonoured by a small group of protesters, many of whom are neither Gidimt’en nor Wet’suwet’en, but nonetheless claim to be acting in our name to protest natural gas development. On Nov. 20 and 21, we convened a virtual meeting to discuss these issues and the recent RCMP raid that was carried out on our ancestral lands. The first thing to understand is that the collective rights of the Wet’suwet’en people to use the land and resources within Wet’suwet’en territory have for hundreds of years been managed through a system of five family based clans led by a hierarchy of leaders who hold hereditary names that have existed since time immemorial. These names are connected to specific areas within our territorial lands, called “nowh yintah,” and have been handed down for generations in a complex governing system we call “Bahlats,” or “the feast hall.”. The names and the powers of those who hold them are conferred on the basis of merit and recognition and, in our Wet’suwet’en law, follow hereditary lines. Traditionally, leaders are groomed for many years by those holding higher rank in the feast hall before progressing to greater responsibilities. Proper conduct and “wiggus” (respect) are among the many valuable lessons passed on during the grooming. This process and the conduct of other business in our traditional system is governed by strict laws and protocols that the leaders are expected to uphold. It is very sad that so many Wet’suwet’en women who supported the pipeline were stripped of their hereditary titles to which they were entitled and the names were passed on to those who oppose the pipeline. Unfortunately, the hereditary system has been disrupted due to disagreements over the pipeline. We hope we can move past this and come together in unity and peace. After all, whether hereditary or elected, the care and concern for the collective is central to everyone involved, even though they take different approaches. The second important thing to understand is that our internal laws are based on a foundational principle of respect that we call “wiggus.” This basically means respect for all things: respect for ourselves and for each other, respect for other people, respect for the feast system, respect for our territorial land and clan boundaries, and respect for all the resources of the land. We reserve the highest levels of respect for our matriarchs, the wise older women who hold a special place in our affairs, as well as for the integrity of lands and resources that are held by other clans. This newsletter tackles hot topics with boldness, verve and wit. (Subscriber-exclusive edition on Fridays). By signing up you consent to receive the above newsletter from Postmedia Network Inc. A welcome email is on its way. If you don't see it, please check your junk folder. The next issue of Platformed will soon be in your inbox. We encountered an issue signing you up. Please try again. We regret to say that nearly everything the so-called Wet’suwet’en land defenders and their supporters have been doing is in direct conflict with these traditional laws and protocols. Their main public spokesperson holds a minor name and is very new to our feast hall. She cannot claim expert knowledge about our culture, yintah and feast hall. She is new to our nation and is not in any way a matriarch, as some have claimed. Nor has she, her supporters or any supporting head chief ever consulted any of us about what they are doing and saying on our behalf. Ellis Ross: Leonardo DiCaprio is wrong — the Coastal GasLink Pipeline is good for Indigenous people. Melissa Mbarki: Blockading workers at northern B.C. gas pipeline was hardly noble. This rift originally stems from an internal dispute that took place in the feast hall and, although we do not wish to discuss clan business publicly, we will say that our matriarchs have been disrespected, bullied, marginalized and mistreated by those who are enabling the spokesperson’s influence on nowh yintah. The protesters have also taken it upon themselves to invite violent people into our territories. We are not violent people. We settle our issues with dialogue and respect. We do not need “warriors” from other First Nations or non-Wet’suwet’en protesters to protect us or speak for us, especially when so many Gidimt’en and so many Wet’suwet’en do not support them. This adversarial approach places our community members at risk, and increases the risk to Wet’suwet’en women, including those who are hereditary chiefs. Remember, we live along the “Highway of Tears.”. Many are also afraid to speak up because of bullying and alienation by aggressive and confrontational people on social media, who do not know the facts. While we understand that many strive to support our perceived struggles through social media, the fact is that many of them have no idea about the history, culture and dynamics at play here, and are doing a grave disservice to many grassroots Gidimt’en, whose ancestors have thrived on nowh yintah since time immemorial. The multitude of outside voices on social media has also served to overshadow the voices of the Gidimt’en and Wet’suwet’en. It has left a majority of Gidimt’en matriarchs, Gidimt’en clan members and Wet’suwet’en voices overlooked, marginalized and disrespected. We are hopeful that those on social media will consider these points and allow all Gidimt’en and Wet’suwet’en to work through these issues in a peaceful and respectful manner that does not put anyone in danger. It is very unfortunate that the conflict has escalated the way it has. Even though we strongly disagree with the militant actions of those claiming to act and speak on our behalf, we seek a peaceful resolution, and we sincerely hope that nobody gets hurt or killed. There are other issues with these protests. Their campsites are environmentally disgraceful and the road that they excavated did not just block pipeline workers, it also blocked our members who use it to access territory and resources to which they are entitled. We also very much understand climate change and the importance of caring for our communities and future generations, but we do not support the conduct of those who are harming the Canadian economy and encouraging supporters to “shut down Canada” during this time of pandemic and crises throughout British Columbia. This is not our way. Then, there is the money. In our culture, money that is raised in the clan’s name is accounted for through the feast system. However, we have received no accounting for the many thousands of dollars in donations that are being collected by protesters in our name. Worst of all, and what causes us to come forward at this time, is that the protesters who claim to respect Wet’suwet’en law showed no respect whatsoever for two of our leading matriarchs who died in recent weeks, or for their families. It is a basic rule in our culture that non-essential activities must cease during a period of mourning; however, protests and public activities carried on as if nothing had happened. The daughter of one of the late matriarchs stated that, “While we brought mom home on Thursday, Oct. 14, 2021, a concert was held at Bovill Square in Smithers by an acquaintance who assists with activities at Gidimt’en Checkpoint. Two of the protesting head chiefs also marched down Main Street in Smithers on the same day.”. The grieving families are devastated by this cruel and shameful misconduct toward their own people and feel marginalized from their ancestral lands, language and oral histories. Clan chiefs are responsible to their clan members, but their current governance model makes it impossible for hereditary chiefs to fulfill their cultural responsibilities. To make things worse, these hereditary chiefs and some others are secretly negotiating agreements about our rights and title with the federal and provincial governments, according to a memorandum of understanding that was signed to end last year’s protests over the pipeline. All of these circumstances leave us questioning how we can move beyond the conflict and take a more unified approach for the good of all Wet’suwet’en. We want the protesters to cease their blockades and for them to stop misleading people and making false claims about our laws. This letter arises from the voices and concerns of a number of Wet’suwet’en matriarchs, Gidimt’en matriarchs, Gidimt’en clan members and members of other clans. We have the right to share our thoughts and concerns about our territory without backlash from those within our nation, but also from non-Wet’suwet’en people who have little or no understanding of our culture, our history, our internal dynamics or our ancestral ways. We ask the media to respect our privacy and security while we grieve for our late matriarchs. Due to COVID-19 and our responsibility to observe a mourning period for our deceased community members and female hereditary chiefs, we will not be granting further interviews at this time. National Post. Share this Story : Opinion: We are Wet'suwet'en and the Coastal GasLink pipeline protesters do not represent us Copy Link Email X Reddit Pinterest LinkedIn Tumblr. Copy Link. Email. X. Reddit. Pinterest. LinkedIn. Tumblr. Secret RCMP report warns Canadians may revolt once they realize how broke they are. Secret RCMP report warns Canadians may revolt once they realize how broke they are. Kate Middleton says she has cancer and is undergoing chemotherapy in new video. Kate Middleton says she has cancer and is undergoing chemotherapy in new video. She is 8, owns a $853K home and her dad says people angry about it obviously haven't 'made sacrifices'. She is 8, owns a $853K home and her dad says people angry about it obviously haven't 'made sacrifices'. FIRST READING: Liberal plan to quietly delay election would secure millions for their doomed MPs. FIRST READING: Liberal plan to quietly delay election would secure millions for their doomed MPs. Chris Selley: Anthony Housefather's place is not with the Conservatives. Chris Selley: Anthony Housefather's place is not with the Conservatives. Solar eclipse 2024: Get ready for the once-in-a-lifetime celestial event How to prepare for the Great North American Eclipse 2 hours ago Shopping Essentials. Solar eclipse 2024: Get ready for the once-in-a-lifetime celestial event. How to prepare for the Great North American Eclipse. Top fragrances: Most popular perfumes plus some hidden gems Dior, La Labo, Tom Ford, Aesop, Jo Malone and more 4 hours ago Shopping Essentials. Top fragrances: Most popular perfumes plus some hidden gems. Dior, La Labo, Tom Ford, Aesop, Jo Malone and more. Advertisement 2Story continues belowThis advertisement has not loaded yet, but your article continues below. Amazon Big Spring Sale: The best deals in Canada 2024 Shop top deals in spring fashion, cleaning products, home organization, fitness gear and more 6 hours ago Shopping Essentials. Amazon Big Spring Sale: The best deals in Canada 2024. Shop top deals in spring fashion, cleaning products, home organization, fitness gear and more. Cozey opens retail location in Toronto, the first of its kind for Canadian sofa-in-a-box brand Montreal-based entrepreneurs share their journey — thinking outside the box sometimes comes in boxes 6 hours ago Shopping Essentials. Cozey opens retail location in Toronto, the first of its kind for Canadian sofa-in-a-box brand. Montreal-based entrepreneurs share their journey — thinking outside the box sometimes comes in boxes. Coffee-tinted lips were a major Oscars makeup moment. Here's how to recreate the look at home This colouring offers a warm brown tone with a touch of pink. 1 day ago Fashion & Beauty. Coffee-tinted lips were a major Oscars makeup moment. Here's how to recreate the look at home. This colouring offers a warm brown tone with a touch of pink. This website uses cookies to personalize your content (including ads), and allows us to analyze our traffic. Read more about cookies here. By continuing to use our site, you agree to our Terms of Service and Privacy Policy. You've reached the 20 article limit. You can manage saved articles in your account. and save up to 100 articles! Looks like you've reached your saved article limit! You can manage your saved articles in your account and clicking the X located at the bottom right of the article. 

