https://calgaryherald.com/pmn/news-pmn/canada-news-pmn/hearing-put-over-to-april-for-coastal-gaslink-pipeline-protesters-in-b-c

Hearing put over to April for Coastal GasLink pipeline protesters in B.C. Author of the article:. You can save this article by registering for free here. Or sign-in if you have an account. Article content. PRINCE GEORGE, B.C. — Fourteen people arrested while protesting a pipeline in northwestern British Columbia will have to wait about two months to learn if contempt charges against them will be pursued as a criminal or civil matter. The 14 were in court in Prince George Monday after being arrested Jan. 7 when heavily armed RCMP officers dismantled a blockade south of Houston, B.C. Subscribe now to read the latest news in your city and across Canada. Unlimited online access to articles from across Canada with one account. Get exclusive access to the Calgary Herald ePaper, an electronic replica of the print edition that you can share, download and comment on. Enjoy insights and behind-the-scenes analysis from our award-winning journalists. Support local journalists and the next generation of journalists. Daily puzzles including the New York Times Crossword. Subscribe now to read the latest news in your city and across Canada. Unlimited online access to articles from across Canada with one account. Get exclusive access to the Calgary Herald ePaper, an electronic replica of the print edition that you can share, download and comment on. Enjoy insights and behind-the-scenes analysis from our award-winning journalists. Support local journalists and the next generation of journalists. Daily puzzles including the New York Times Crossword. Create an account or sign in to continue with your reading experience. Access articles from across Canada with one account. Share your thoughts and join the conversation in the comments. Enjoy additional articles per month. Get email updates from your favourite authors. Sign In or Create an Account. Justice Marguerite Church agreed with a request to put the matter over to April 15 to give more time to go over disclosure and allow the B.C. Criminal Justice Branch to consider how to proceed. Whether to move to the matter to Smithers, closer to where the defendants live, will also be considered at the April hearing. Arrests began after Coastal GasLink won an interim injunction prohibiting protesters from impeding pre-construction work on the $6.2-billion pipeline which would carry natural gas from northeastern B.C. to Kitimat. The gas would then be liquefied for shipment overseas as part of the recently approved $40-billion LNG Canada project. Meanwhile, those opposing a permanent injunction against any further blockades of the pipeline now have until Feb. 20 to make their case after the deadline was extended from Jan. 31. Coastal GasLink has been given until May 31 to file its response. (Prince George Citizen). Share this Story : Hearing put over to April for Coastal GasLink pipeline protesters in B.C. Copy Link Email X Reddit Pinterest LinkedIn Tumblr. Copy Link. Email. X. Reddit. Pinterest. LinkedIn. Tumblr. Opinion: A tale of two provinces — one leading Canada, the other lagging. Opinion: A tale of two provinces — one leading Canada, the other lagging. 'Not surprised': Vandalized Recall Gondek sign and others had no permit. 'Not surprised': Vandalized Recall Gondek sign and others had no permit. Bell: Mayor Gondek is really steamed over recall petition drive to punt her. Bell: Mayor Gondek is really steamed over recall petition drive to punt her. Former Medicine Hat police chief suing City of Medicine Hat, police service. Former Medicine Hat police chief suing City of Medicine Hat, police service. Rural MLA who criticized heart attack patients named to Alberta Health role. Rural MLA who criticized heart attack patients named to Alberta Health role. This website uses cookies to personalize your content (including ads), and allows us to analyze our traffic. Read more about cookies here. By continuing to use our site, you agree to our Terms of Service and Privacy Policy. You've reached the 20 article limit. You can manage saved articles in your account. and save up to 100 articles! Looks like you've reached your saved article limit! You can manage your saved articles in your account and clicking the X located at the bottom right of the article. 