https://torontosun.com/news/national/pipeline-protests-timeline-of-how-we-got-here

PIPELINE PROTESTS: Timeline of how we got here. You can save this article by registering for free here. Or sign-in if you have an account. Article content. Canada is entering the third week of protests and blockades over the construction of the $6.6 billion Coastal GasLink pipeline expansion project in Northern British Columbia. Subscribe now to read the latest news in your city and across Canada. Unlimited online access to articles from across Canada with one account. Get exclusive access to the Toronto Sun ePaper, an electronic replica of the print edition that you can share, download and comment on. Enjoy insights and behind-the-scenes analysis from our award-winning journalists. Support local journalists and the next generation of journalists. Daily puzzles including the New York Times Crossword. Subscribe now to read the latest news in your city and across Canada. Unlimited online access to articles from across Canada with one account. Get exclusive access to the Toronto Sun ePaper, an electronic replica of the print edition that you can share, download and comment on. Enjoy insights and behind-the-scenes analysis from our award-winning journalists. Support local journalists and the next generation of journalists. Daily puzzles including the New York Times Crossword. Create an account or sign in to continue with your reading experience. Access articles from across Canada with one account. Share your thoughts and join the conversation in the comments. Enjoy additional articles per month. Get email updates from your favourite authors. Don't have an account? Create Account. The divisive issue has sparked heated debate across Canada over what should be done to resolve the situation. PIPELINE PROTESTS: Timeline of how we got here Back to video. Here’s a brief look back at how we got here:. June 18, 2019 – The Trans Mountain Expansion Project gains approval from the Canadian government. Dec. 31, 2019 – Coastal GasLink is granted a court-ordered injunction by the B.C. Supreme Court to remove protestors and blockades stopping work on the pipeline expansion project. Jan. 1, 2020 – The Wet’suwet’en First Nation serves Coastal GasLink with an eviction notice, telling the company workers are “currently trespassing” on their unceded territory. Jan. 30, 2020 – The hereditary chiefs of the Wet’suwet’en agree to seven days of meetings with the B.C. government. Your noon-hour look at what's happening in Toronto and beyond. By signing up you consent to receive the above newsletter from Postmedia Network Inc. A welcome email is on its way. If you don't see it, please check your junk folder. The next issue of Your Midday Sun will soon be in your inbox. We encountered an issue signing you up. Please try again. Feb. 5, 2020 – Negotiations between the Province and hereditary chiefs of the Wet’suwet’en break down after two days. Feb. 6, 2020 – RCMP officers move to enforce the court injunction to remove blockades preventing construction on the Coastal GasLink pipeline in Wet’suwet’en territory. In Ontario, a blockade is erected in Tyendinaga preventing CN Rail traffic. Feb. 7, 2020 – Via Rail cancels all service between Toronto, Ottawa and Montreal. CN Rail obtains a court injunction to remove the blockade in Tyendiaga. Feb. 13, 2020 – CN Rail’s court injunction is not enforced in Ontario, prompting the rail service to shut down all operations in Eastern Canada. CN Rail says blockades in Manitoba end and expect those in B.C. to follow suit. Feb. 16, 2020 – Prime Minister Justin Trudeau cancels a political trip to Barbados amidst mounting political and economic pressure. A protest in Ontario shuts down a U.S. border crossing. Feb. 18, 2020– An emergency debate is held in the House of Commons where Prime Minister Justin Trudeau and Opposition Leader Andrew Scheer clash over what to do. CN Rail announces 450 employees will be temporarily laid off. LILLEY: It's time for different voices in the blockade battle. LILLEY: Trudeau alienates all sides in blockade battle. BONOKOSKI: PM talks ‘rule of law’ while blockade protesters give it the finger. Feb. 19, 2020– CN Rail announces 1000 more employees will be temporarily laid off. Protestors erect a blockade along a rail line in Edmonton but counter-protestors try to forcibly dismantle the blockade. Feb. 20, 2020– The RCMP moves off of Wet’suwet’en territory into a nearby town, which Federal Public Safety Minister Bill Blair says meets a key condition from the hereditary chiefs. Feb. 21, 2020– Prime Minister Trudeau provided an update on the status of the protests and blockades across the nation saying “the barricades need to come down now,” and that the situation is “unacceptable and untenable.” PM Trudeau reiterated the injunctions to clear tracks must be obeyed and the law must be upheld. A group of hereditary leaders from the Wet’suwet’en Nation visit protestors in Tyendianga. Feb. 22, 2020 – Thousands of protesters rally in downtown Toronto in support of the Wet’suwet’en hereditary chiefs who are opposed to Coast GasLink pipeline. — With files from The Canadian Press. Share this Story : PIPELINE PROTESTS: Timeline of how we got here Copy Link Email X Reddit Pinterest LinkedIn Tumblr. Copy Link. Email. X. Reddit. Pinterest. LinkedIn. Tumblr. Real and spectacular? Paige Spiranac opens up about enhancements. Real and spectacular? Paige Spiranac opens up about enhancements. SIMMONS: Maple Leafs superstar Auston Matthews won't likely win MVP, even if he hits the 70-goal milestone. SIMMONS: Maple Leafs superstar Auston Matthews won't likely win MVP, even if he hits the 70-goal milestone. Raunchy sex cop Maegan Hall wins $500K lawsuit against police service. Raunchy sex cop Maegan Hall wins $500K lawsuit against police service. Scarborough food court restaurant shut down by health inspectors. Scarborough food court restaurant shut down by health inspectors. WARMINGTON: Mounties fear angry Canadians may rebel against federal government. WARMINGTON: Mounties fear angry Canadians may rebel against federal government. This website uses cookies to personalize your content (including ads), and allows us to analyze our traffic. Read more about cookies here. By continuing to use our site, you agree to our Terms of Service and Privacy Policy. You've reached the 20 article limit. You can manage saved articles in your account. and save up to 100 articles! Looks like you've reached your saved article limit! You can manage your saved articles in your account and clicking the X located at the bottom right of the article. 