https://ca.sports.yahoo.com/news/wetsuweten-protesters-block-coastal-gaslink-005328539.html?guccounter=1&guce_referrer=aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuZ29vZ2xlLmNvbS8&guce_referrer_sig=AQAAABuJGhb4yKjLy8VHLvm7fnDUxeBW2L4lADBpf5GFJRB0EK3tjSbxrVyO8cK2DxPrCy3UGo6bdJRDXfF6nWe1O5tLhfSoL0xJGKWJl_Zo9Tj4TNqRYgB6wvh1qlIDrvTAt_XIbfvAOs37j5I3FruvcYDQ7dBdd6BzD5w4plX5r4zP

Wet'suwet'en protesters block Coastal GasLink site again, 1 month after RCMP crackdown. One month after the high-profile arrests of dozens people on Wet'suwet'en territory, a group identifying themselves as land defenders returned Sunday to reoccupy a protest camp, blocking access to a Coastal GasLink pipeline drill site in northern British Columbia. "The Wet'suwet'en hereditary chiefs' eviction notice to Coastal GasLink still stands," Jennifer Wickham, media co-ordinator for the Gidimt'en Checkpoint told CBC News. She said Wet'suwet'en people and their supporters "are doing what they can in order to ensure that no pipelines cross traditional territory.". Wickham wouldn't say how many people had returned to the remote Coyote Camp. The Gidimt'en Clan of the Wet'suwet'en Nation re-issued notice to Coastal GasLink on Nov. 14 that it would be enforcing the eviction of pipeline workers from its territories. The notice provided an eight-hour window for pipeline workers to move out of the territory before the access road near Houston was blocked. On Nov. 18 and 19, RCMP arrested about 30 Wet-suwet'en members and supporters — along with two photojournalists — in the same remote part of northern B.C., about 1,000 kilometres north of Vancouver. They said the arrests were made because protesters had left more than 500 people stranded at a work camp, where supplies were running out. In an written statement Monday, Coastal GasLink said "10 to 12 camouflaged and masked opponents took over the Marten Forest Service Road and Morice River drill site.". The statement said that security officials "left the site for fear of their safety.". With bitterly cold temperatures dropping to –20 C and below, Wickham said many people were wearing face coverings. A written statement released Monday by the RCMP North District's Cpl. Madonna Saunderson said police are investigating reports that a group of protesters "allegedly threatened Coastal GasLink security officials, damaged trucks and fired flares and bear bangers at security officials.". Wickham was not in the camp at the time but said she questions the RCMP statement. "We have heard false testimony from the RCMP before about us.". Last month's arrests at the camp by heavily armed RCMP officers marked the third police operation in as many years at barricades aimed at stopping construction of the Coastal GasLink pipeline, which would carry natural gas to a $40 billion export terminal on the coast. Video footage provided to the media last month by filmmaker Michael Toledano showed RCMP tactical officers breaking down a door with an axe and chainsaw to arrest pipeline opponents at Coyote Camp. Toledano was working on a documentary commissioned by CBC's The Passionate Eye at the time of his arrest. WATCH | RCMP move in to arrest people at a protest camp on Wet'suwet'en territory:. Wickham said the people who re-occupied the area Sunday are not the same ones who were arrested in November. As a condition of their release, most were required to sign an undertaking to stay away from the area, except for several Wet'suwet'en women, who are allowed into the area for cultural reasons. Coastal GasLink said on Sunday the situation is an "escalation in unlawful and dangerous activities" by opponents who are putting "people, property, and the environment at risk.". The company's 670-kilometre pipeline is 60 per cent complete. Coastal GasLink has signed deals with 20 elected band councils along the pipeline route, including from Wet'suwet'en territory, but has not won approval of the majority of hereditary chiefs. The hereditary chiefs assert authority over 22,000 square kilometres of the nation's traditional territory, an area recognized as unceded by the Supreme Court of Canada in a 1997 decision. Wickham said people in Coyote Camp are anticipating more arrests and police action "against unarmed Indigenous people.". Latest Stories. LA TimesMegan Fox confirms her engagement to Machine Gun Kelly is off, lists plastic surgeries'Jennifer's Body' star Megan Fox opened up about her engagement to Machine Gun Kelly and listed all her cosmetic procedures on the 'Call Her Daddy' podcast.23 hours ago. Megan Fox confirms her engagement to Machine Gun Kelly is off, lists plastic surgeries. 'Jennifer's Body' star Megan Fox opened up about her engagement to Machine Gun Kelly and listed all her cosmetic procedures on the 'Call Her Daddy' podcast. Associated PressRussia says 40 killed and more than 100 wounded in attack on Moscow concert hallSeveral assailants burst into a large concert hall in Moscow on Friday and sprayed the crowd with gunfire, killing at least 40 people, injuring more than 100 others and setting fire to the venue in a brazen attack just days after President Vladimir Putin cemented his grip on power in a highly orchestrated electoral landslide. It wasn't immediately clear what happened to the attackers, and there were no immediate claims of responsibility for the raid, which Moscow Mayor Sergei Sobyanin described as a “huge tragedy" and which state authorities were investigating as terrorism. The attack, which left the concert hall in flames with a collapsing roof, was the deadliest in Russia in years and came as the country's war in Ukraine dragged into a third year.3 hours ago. Russia says 40 killed and more than 100 wounded in attack on Moscow concert hall. Several assailants burst into a large concert hall in Moscow on Friday and sprayed the crowd with gunfire, killing at least 40 people, injuring more than 100 others and setting fire to the venue in a brazen attack just days after President Vladimir Putin cemented his grip on power in a highly orchestrated electoral landslide. It wasn't immediately clear what happened to the attackers, and there were no immediate claims of responsibility for the raid, which Moscow Mayor Sergei Sobyanin described as a “huge tragedy" and which state authorities were investigating as terrorism. The attack, which left the concert hall in flames with a collapsing roof, was the deadliest in Russia in years and came as the country's war in Ukraine dragged into a third year. Ad•GoodRxWhy this Ad?Ad FeedbackWhy don't you like this ad?Thank you for your feedback. We will remove this and make the changes needed.AdWhat Is Eye Inflammation? - GoodRx. Why this Ad? Ad Feedback. Why don't you like this ad? AdWhat Is Eye Inflammation? - GoodRx. Yahoo Canada StyleCanadian tennis star Eugenie Bouchard poses with twin sister on Aspen ski slope: What we know about the BouchardsCanadian tennis star Eugenie Bouchard and her twin sister reunited for some winter sports.5 hours ago. Canadian tennis star Eugenie Bouchard poses with twin sister on Aspen ski slope: What we know about the Bouchards. Canadian tennis star Eugenie Bouchard and her twin sister reunited for some winter sports. HuffPost‘Sorry, Donald’: Joe Biden Unleashes Absolutely Vicious Joke At Trump’s ExpenseDark Brandon strikes again.14 hours ago. ‘Sorry, Donald’: Joe Biden Unleashes Absolutely Vicious Joke At Trump’s Expense. Dark Brandon strikes again. Yahoo Canada StyleSophie Grégoire Trudeau says she and Prime Minister Justin Trudeau don't have a 'parental sharing plan': 'We keep each other posted'The 48-year-old mother-of-three spoke to Vogue about her life after ending her marriage of 18 years.a day ago. Sophie Grégoire Trudeau says she and Prime Minister Justin Trudeau don't have a 'parental sharing plan': 'We keep each other posted'. The 48-year-old mother-of-three spoke to Vogue about her life after ending her marriage of 18 years. Ad•Emergency GeneratorsWhy this Ad?Ad FeedbackWhy don't you like this ad?Thank you for your feedback. We will remove this and make the changes needed.AdAshburn: Unsold 2023 Emergency Generators May Cost Almost...Unsold emergency generators may now be available in much lower prices for consumers. Search your options here. Why this Ad? Ad Feedback. Why don't you like this ad? AdAshburn: Unsold 2023 Emergency Generators May Cost Almost... Unsold emergency generators may now be available in much lower prices for consumers. Search your options here. SnopesFact Check: Photo Purportedly Shows Barron Trump Taking Picture of Melania Trump While Sitting on Her Lap. Here Are the FactsSocial media users questioned whether the image of the Trumps was legitimate.a day ago. Fact Check: Photo Purportedly Shows Barron Trump Taking Picture of Melania Trump While Sitting on Her Lap. Here Are the Facts. Social media users questioned whether the image of the Trumps was legitimate. The Daily BeastTrump Claims He’s Scraped Together Almost $500M ‘IN CASH’ as Fraud Bond Deadline LoomsAlyssa Pointer/ReutersDonald Trump says he’s managed to pull together almost half a billion dollars to pay his eye-watering appeal bond owed to New York state after he and his companies were found liable for fraud.The GOP’s presumptive nominee claimed in recent legal filings that he hasn’t been able to secure more than $460 million required to post his bond and appeal the eye-watering ruling against him. New York Attorney General Letitia James could begin action to start seizing Trump’s assets a8 hours ago. Trump Claims He’s Scraped Together Almost $500M ‘IN CASH’ as Fraud Bond Deadline Looms. Alyssa Pointer/ReutersDonald Trump says he’s managed to pull together almost half a billion dollars to pay his eye-watering appeal bond owed to New York state after he and his companies were found liable for fraud.The GOP’s presumptive nominee claimed in recent legal filings that he hasn’t been able to secure more than $460 million required to post his bond and appeal the eye-watering ruling against him. New York Attorney General Letitia James could begin action to start seizing Trump’s assets a. HuffPost'Complete Failure': Marjorie Taylor Greene Mocked After Unexpected GOP ConfessionThe far-right lawmaker finally said something her critics could agree with.17 hours ago. 'Complete Failure': Marjorie Taylor Greene Mocked After Unexpected GOP Confession. The far-right lawmaker finally said something her critics could agree with. Ad•Chaikin AnalyticsWhy this Ad?Ad FeedbackWhy don't you like this ad?Thank you for your feedback. We will remove this and make the changes needed.AdBuying Nvidia? Wall Street Legend Issues Urgent A.I.... Why this Ad? Ad Feedback. Why don't you like this ad? AdBuying Nvidia? Wall Street Legend Issues Urgent A.I.... Yahoo News Canada'Love and support': Politicians, Internet react after Kate Middleton reveals cancer diagnosisThe Princess of Wales shared news of her health in a video shared to social media on Friday.2 hours ago. 'Love and support': Politicians, Internet react after Kate Middleton reveals cancer diagnosis. The Princess of Wales shared news of her health in a video shared to social media on Friday. NextSharkWatch: South Korean actor Jeon Jong-seo captivates Dodgers playersDespite the Dodgers’ 14-3 victory, it was Jeon's ceremonial first pitch that garnered attention, particularly from the Dodgers dugout. To kickstart the game, Jeon, who was donning a Dodgers shirt, leggings and knee-high baseball socks, threw the first pitch at the Gocheok Sky Dome on March 17.4 hours ago. Watch: South Korean actor Jeon Jong-seo captivates Dodgers players. Despite the Dodgers’ 14-3 victory, it was Jeon's ceremonial first pitch that garnered attention, particularly from the Dodgers dugout. To kickstart the game, Jeon, who was donning a Dodgers shirt, leggings and knee-high baseball socks, threw the first pitch at the Gocheok Sky Dome on March 17. USA TODAY OpinionMTG files ludicrous motion to oust House speaker. Let's Make Stupidity Embarrassing Again.Georgia Rep. Marjorie Taylor Greene has shown herself again to be attention-seeking, spiteful, unserious and proudly ignorant. All things MAGA.4 hours ago. MTG files ludicrous motion to oust House speaker. Let's Make Stupidity Embarrassing Again. Georgia Rep. Marjorie Taylor Greene has shown herself again to be attention-seeking, spiteful, unserious and proudly ignorant. All things MAGA. Ad•Zacks Investment ResearchWhy this Ad?Ad FeedbackWhy don't you like this ad?Thank you for your feedback. We will remove this and make the changes needed.AdThe 5 stocks Set to Double - Not the ones you expectExplore the secret behind doubling your investments with these top 5 stock recommendations from industry-leading experts. Why this Ad? Ad Feedback. Why don't you like this ad? AdThe 5 stocks Set to Double - Not the ones you expect. Explore the secret behind doubling your investments with these top 5 stock recommendations from industry-leading experts. NY Daily NewsPaul Simon opens up on ending friendship and partnership with Art GarfunkelNEW YORK — Paul Simon is slip slidin’ back to the days of working with Art Garfunkel, and peeling back the curtain on what ended their iconic yet “uneven” partnership and decadeslong friendship. The Grammy-winning Simon & Garfunkel co-founder, 82, noted in the first half of MGM+’s “In Restless Dreams: The Music of Paul Simon” that they “were really best friends up until ‘Bridge over Troubled ...a day ago. Paul Simon opens up on ending friendship and partnership with Art Garfunkel. NEW YORK — Paul Simon is slip slidin’ back to the days of working with Art Garfunkel, and peeling back the curtain on what ended their iconic yet “uneven” partnership and decadeslong friendship. The Grammy-winning Simon & Garfunkel co-founder, 82, noted in the first half of MGM+’s “In Restless Dreams: The Music of Paul Simon” that they “were really best friends up until ‘Bridge over Troubled ... HuffPost‘You Think She Hates Him Now?’: Jimmy Kimmel Hits Trump Right In The MarriageThe late-night host said Trump’s financial struggles could be taking a toll on another part of his life.2 days ago. ‘You Think She Hates Him Now?’: Jimmy Kimmel Hits Trump Right In The Marriage. The late-night host said Trump’s financial struggles could be taking a toll on another part of his life. CBCSome Ontario landlords are calling for 'automatic' evictions for tenants who don't pay rentWhen Zahid Mahmood bought a house in Oshawa, Ont., in 2021, he hoped rental income would help him and his wife save money to pay for post-secondary education for their three children. Walking into the house last month, Mahmood says he was faced with piles of trash, bottles of urine, rodents and dog feces — the mess left behind by former tenants. Mahmood says the tenants moved into the house in May 2022 and stopped paying rent a year later. In August, he and his wife gave the tenants an N4 evicti13 hours ago. Some Ontario landlords are calling for 'automatic' evictions for tenants who don't pay rent. When Zahid Mahmood bought a house in Oshawa, Ont., in 2021, he hoped rental income would help him and his wife save money to pay for post-secondary education for their three children. Walking into the house last month, Mahmood says he was faced with piles of trash, bottles of urine, rodents and dog feces — the mess left behind by former tenants. Mahmood says the tenants moved into the house in May 2022 and stopped paying rent a year later. In August, he and his wife gave the tenants an N4 evicti. Ad•Online Shopping ToolsWhy this Ad?Ad FeedbackWhy don't you like this ad?Thank you for your feedback. We will remove this and make the changes needed.AdAmazon Hates When You Do This, But They Can’t Stop You...This simple trick can save tons of money on Amazon, but most Prime members are ignoring it. Why this Ad? Ad Feedback. Why don't you like this ad? AdAmazon Hates When You Do This, But They Can’t Stop You... This simple trick can save tons of money on Amazon, but most Prime members are ignoring it. HuffPostEx-RNC Chair Warns Why ‘All Hell’s About To Break Loose’ With Donald Trump Campaign“I don’t think people really appreciate exactly what we are going to be in for,” said Michael Steele.2 days ago. Ex-RNC Chair Warns Why ‘All Hell’s About To Break Loose’ With Donald Trump Campaign. “I don’t think people really appreciate exactly what we are going to be in for,” said Michael Steele. The Daily BeastArkansas Airport Exec Dies After Shootout With ATF AgentsPhoto Illustration by The Daily Beast/Handout Courtesy of Bill and Hillary Clinton AirportBryan Malinowski, the Arkansas airport executive injured in a shootout with federal agents serving a search warrant at his home earlier this week, died Thursday, his employer confirmed.The 53-year-old allegedly opened fire as agents with the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and Explosives attempted to serve the warrant at his home in Little Rock shortly after 6 a.m. on Tuesday, with one agent suffering9 hours ago. Arkansas Airport Exec Dies After Shootout With ATF Agents. Photo Illustration by The Daily Beast/Handout Courtesy of Bill and Hillary Clinton AirportBryan Malinowski, the Arkansas airport executive injured in a shootout with federal agents serving a search warrant at his home earlier this week, died Thursday, his employer confirmed.The 53-year-old allegedly opened fire as agents with the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and Explosives attempted to serve the warrant at his home in Little Rock shortly after 6 a.m. on Tuesday, with one agent suffering. PeopleKing Charles Informed of Kate Middleton's Cancer Diagnosis as He Also Undergoes Treatment for CancerOn Feb. 5, King Charles announced he was undergoing treatment for cancer3 hours ago. King Charles Informed of Kate Middleton's Cancer Diagnosis as He Also Undergoes Treatment for Cancer. On Feb. 5, King Charles announced he was undergoing treatment for cancer. Ad•GrammarlyWhy this Ad?Ad FeedbackWhy don't you like this ad?Thank you for your feedback. We will remove this and make the changes needed.AdFix Grammatical Errors and Typos With this Desktop AppImprove grammar, word choice, and sentence structure everywhere you work. Write better with Grammarly. Why this Ad? Ad Feedback. Why don't you like this ad? AdFix Grammatical Errors and Typos With this Desktop App. Improve grammar, word choice, and sentence structure everywhere you work. Write better with Grammarly. HuffPostGOP Senators Laugh Off Giving Money To Help Trump Post Bond In New York“Are you trolling?” one GOP senator said when asked if he'd be willing to help pay for Donald Trump's multimillion-dollar legal fees in New York.a day ago. GOP Senators Laugh Off Giving Money To Help Trump Post Bond In New York. “Are you trolling?” one GOP senator said when asked if he'd be willing to help pay for Donald Trump's multimillion-dollar legal fees in New York. HuffPostEx-Prosecutor Stunned By Trump's New Legal Claim: 'Doesn't Make Any Sense At All'Andrew Weissmann also suggested the "real issue" behind the former president's struggles to secure bond to appeal his civil fraud conviction.a day ago. Ex-Prosecutor Stunned By Trump's New Legal Claim: 'Doesn't Make Any Sense At All'. Andrew Weissmann also suggested the "real issue" behind the former president's struggles to secure bond to appeal his civil fraud conviction. HuffPostJake Tapper Blasts Trump Adviser’s Big Biden Claim With ‘Little Fact Check’The CNN host shut down Jason Miller with a lone clip of the former president’s past rally behavior.14 hours ago. Jake Tapper Blasts Trump Adviser’s Big Biden Claim With ‘Little Fact Check’. The CNN host shut down Jason Miller with a lone clip of the former president’s past rally behavior. 