https://winnipegsun.com/opinion/quesnel-eco-extremism-under-reported-in-canada-and-manitoba

QUESNEL: Eco-extremism under-reported in Canada and Manitoba. You can save this article by registering for free here. Or sign-in if you have an account. Article content. Ottawa and Canadian security agencies are ignoring a threat posed by eco-extremists motivated by self-righteous climate change alarmism. Subscribe now to read the latest news in your city and across Canada. Exclusive columns by Ryan Stelter, Paul Friesen, Ted Wyman, Scott Billeck, Lorrie Goldstein, Warren Kinsella and others. Plus newsletters: Gimme Stelter for your beat on the city, The Exit Row for all your Jets news and On the Rocks for curling. Unlimited online access to Winnipeg Sun and 15 news sites with one account. Winnipeg Sun ePaper, an electronic replica of the print edition to view on any device, share and comment on. Daily puzzles, including the New York Times Crossword. Support local journalism. Subscribe now to read the latest news in your city and across Canada. Exclusive columns by Ryan Stelter, Paul Friesen, Ted Wyman, Scott Billeck, Lorrie Goldstein, Warren Kinsella and others. Plus newsletters: Gimme Stelter for your beat on the city, The Exit Row for all your Jets news and On the Rocks for curling. Unlimited online access to Winnipeg Sun and 15 news sites with one account. Winnipeg Sun ePaper, an electronic replica of the print edition to view on any device, share and comment on. Daily puzzles, including the New York Times Crossword. Support local journalism. Create an account or sign in to continue with your reading experience. Access articles from across Canada with one account. Share your thoughts and join the conversation in the comments. Enjoy additional articles per month. Get email updates from your favourite authors. Sign In or Create an Account. QUESNEL: Eco-extremism under-reported in Canada and Manitoba Back to video. How many Manitobans remember that shortly after the federal government introduced emergency legislation against convoy protesters there was a real terrorist attack on a Coastal GasLink pipeline worksite in British Columbia? About 20 masked assailants wielding axes entered a pipeline worksite, intimidated Coastal GasLink workers and caused millions of dollars of damage to equipment and vehicles. While politicians and mainstream media were fixated on bouncy castles and hot tubs, armed fanatics were intimidating human beings with weapons and destroying energy infrastructure. There was bare mention of it in the media. Politicians made cursory mention of it on social media. Unlike the convoy protests, there were no in-depth investigative pieces immediately after the eco-terrorist attacks against Coastal GasLink. Get the latest headlines, breaking news and columns. By signing up you consent to receive the above newsletter from Postmedia Network Inc. A welcome email is on its way. If you don't see it, please check your junk folder. The next issue of The Winnipeg Sun's Daily Headline News will soon be in your inbox. We encountered an issue signing you up. Please try again. Eventually, some media picked up on this terror attack but then downplayed it. CBC’s Fifth Estate months later aired a program that attempted to disparage an RCMP unit meant to investigate extremist attacks on energy sector infrastructure. In a piece of over 40 minutes, less than a minute was devoted to exploring the February 2022 terror attack. The CBC wrote more about the attack and did identify the culprits as anarchists but did not explore their ideological motivations. It was almost like they were just anarchists bent on destruction without a coherent ideology. Perhaps if they would do a deep dive, they would discover that the anarchists believing they are helping an Indigenous resurgence have been raised on a diet of unscientific climate change alarmism. I recently compiled research for a Frontier Centre study that looked at this looming eco-extremist threat. Besides the Coastal GasLink attack, there are extremist groups like Just Stop Oil and Extinction Rebellion (in Canada). Traffic disruptions caused by Just Stop Oil have already led to bodily harm and unnecessary deaths in the UK where traffic mayhem ensued over a stunt on a bridge. Canada has a serious blind spot when it comes to extremism associated with the far left. CSIS and Public Safety Canada are endlessly fixated on extremism associated loosely with the right, like Incels or anyone concerned about forced injections via vaccine mandates. In Canada, the threat comes from various “Indigeno-anarchists” who believe they are supporting Indigenous people even as they attack energy projects that help First Nation communities. I discovered these extremists teach and recruit at our universities. Many professors are activists who normalize terrorism against the energy sector. Many were involved in the 2019-2020 Wet’suwet’en rail blockades that opposed Coastal GasLink. Winnipeg activists were certainly involved. During the Wet’suwet’en blockades, they engaged in five major actions in Manitoba, from a demonstration outside an RCMP station to an action where “Indigenous warriors” blocked CN and CP rail tracks for several hours. Calling themselves anarchists, they engaged in acts that could cause bodily harm and affect people’s ability to travel on passenger trains. Here is a document confirming they intended to commit “railroad sabotage.” Anarchists also make open mention of acts of sabotage and damage to drill sites associated with Coastal GasLink. Central to the problem is problematic and torqued-up climate change rhetoric that is causing unnecessary fear and anxiety within the public and is radicalizing people. If you believe the “earth is on fire” – which is a false belief held by many activists – some become radicalized to commit property damage and threaten lives. Manitobans and Canadians must address the looming eco-terrorist threat before it’s too late. — Joseph Quesnel is a Senior Research Fellow with the Frontier Centre for Public Policy.www.fcpp.org. Share this Story : QUESNEL: Eco-extremism under-reported in Canada and Manitoba Copy Link Email X Reddit Pinterest LinkedIn Tumblr. Copy Link. Email. X. Reddit. Pinterest. LinkedIn. Tumblr. Rural Manitoba community offering properties for low, low price of $10 getting plenty of takers. Rural Manitoba community offering properties for low, low price of $10 getting plenty of takers. 'Just unacceptable': Jets PK thumped by struggling Devils. 'Just unacceptable': Jets PK thumped by struggling Devils. Pair wanted after series of retail thefts. Pair wanted after series of retail thefts. Winnipeg city council votes 11-3 to reopen landmark Portage and Main to pedestrians. Winnipeg city council votes 11-3 to reopen landmark Portage and Main to pedestrians. Sparks fly as non-confidence motion fails to bring down Liberal government over federal carbon tax. Sparks fly as non-confidence motion fails to bring down Liberal government over federal carbon tax. This website uses cookies to personalize your content (including ads), and allows us to analyze our traffic. Read more about cookies here. By continuing to use our site, you agree to our Terms of Service and Privacy Policy. You've reached the 20 article limit. You can manage saved articles in your account. and save up to 100 articles! Looks like you've reached your saved article limit! You can manage your saved articles in your account and clicking the X located at the bottom right of the article. 
