https://hk-norman.com/2021/04/26/stolen-land-a-look-at-pipelines-protests-colonialism-and-storytelling/

HK Norman – Journalism. I write things. Stolen Land: a look at pipelines, protests, colonialism, and storytelling. When you think of Canada, what’s the first thing that comes to mind? For some people, it’s hockey. For others, it’s maple syrup. For an alarming number, it’s the image of their ‘sexy’ Prime Minister, Justin Trudeau. But, for the vast majority of people, when they think of Canada, they conjure up this idea of this grand liberal utopia just north of the United States, where everyone and anyone can live as freely as they like, with no discrimination based on race, gender, religion, or sexual orientation. I will openly admit that this is the image that I, too, had of Canada, for a very long time. At least, until I actually went there for myself. Sure, on the surface, the image holds up. The people are welcoming, and well-meaning. LGBTQ+ people and minorities generally have it okay. If you’re American, the cheap pharmaceuticals and free healthcare probably seem pretty nifty. But why do we have this image of Canada? Why is it, when we think of Canada, the first things we think of are the rolling, picturesque landscapes, the Rocky Mountains, and the Toronto Skyline? Why do we continuously praise Canada for its progress on LGBTQ2S+ rights and its acceptance of minorities? Why do we think of Canada as this big, beautiful utopia where everyone holds hands and loves each other? The answer is actually a little simpler than you think. It’s colonialism. I know, I know, you’ve probably groaned at me for dropping the c-word there, as you’re probably sick of hearing it by now. But before you stop reading and close this tab, I hope you’ll stay with me for at least a little while so I can explain why. Taking the perspective of an outsider to Canada, because I am one (for now), the image we see of Canada is one that is tailored for us, and it is an image seen by a lot of people within Canada. We see the Canada that the Canadian government wants us to see. We see the progressive utopia because that’s the image we’re shown, it’s what makes Canada attractive. It’s a marketing tactic. Colonialism plays into it because it’s the colonist government that projects that image and does so knowingly. In essence, the Canadian government is telling a story. A story of a Canada that has done no wrong. A Canada where all are welcome, where all are provided for, and where we all look out for each other. And it’s a pretty nice story. But is it a true story? Have you ever wondered why we, as outsiders, very rarely talk about colonialism in the context of Canada? How much do you know about the First Nations? How many of you actually know who the First Nations are? Take the United States, for example. The atrocities committed by the United States government against Native Americans is fairly common knowledge to most in the western world, even outside of the US. Those who keep an eye on US politics are well aware of the recent issues surrounding pipelines. Even those who don’t keep an eye on US politics know just how ‘dodgy’ the circumstances around the ceding of land by Natives to the US government were. At this stage, it won’t come as a shocking reveal when I tell you that it’s the same story in Canada. When we think of the Native Americans and those images that crop up of tipis and Pocahontas, a lot those images apply to the Canadian First Nations too. When we think of the struggles around US pipelines, attempted erasure by consigning Natives to history, issues around building on Native land, and the stories of Native women who disappear and are murdered, it’s the same story in Canada. And it is strange that we, as outsiders, use different narratives for the US treatment of natives and the Canadian treatment of natives. When talking about Canada, we don’t talk about the disappearances of First Nation women that continue to this day. We don’t talk about the revelations of forced sterilisation uncovered in the 1960s. We don’t talk about how First Nations are forced to assimilate into white culture to be able to access better education, healthcare, and housing. As outsiders, we’re shielded from this. Unless we speak to Canadians who are deeply politically engaged or just aware of what goes on with the First Nations, we largely go along blissfully unaware of the ordeals faced by the First Nations, both in the past and in the present day. This is because of the narratives and stories fed to us by the Canadian government. These narratives come from the preconceived images we have of both the US and Canada. In general we see the US as this big, boisterous, slightly backward country that rants and raves about freedom while systemically oppressing anyone who isn’t white, straight, and in some states, a male. We often contrast Canada to this, seeing it as the slightly mature, more refined version of the United States, seeing it as more open and welcoming, more soft spoken, without carrying the baggage of the systemic oppression that, certainly in the last year, seems to be more and more visible within the United States. It’s for this reason that I was more than just a little bit shocked, when I went to Canada myself and lived there for nearly a year, that it didn’t take much scratching away at the surface to discover just how flawed and skewed the narratives around Canada were. Gone was the image of a liberal, progressive wonderland for LGBTQ2S+ people, minorities, and refugees where everyone holds hands and loves each other. Replacing it was the image of a country with an institutional racism against its First Nations with horrific atrocities committed in the past and still hasn’t learned its lesson today, due to a near-cult worship of an unsustainable resource. Of course, that last part is hyperbole, but you get my point. If anything, the hyperbole is indicative of a different narrative surrounding Canada that I myself have bought into – but we’ll get to that later. I should say that it was a narrative that I made a conscious decision to scratch away at. Whilst I was in Canada, a wild controversy was raging about the construction of the Coastal GasLink pipeline – a natural gas pipeline running from western British Columbia to the BC coast, with the aim of exporting gas to Asian customers. The main sticking point for those opposed to the pipeline was that a portion of it ran through land belonging to the Wet’suwet’en First Nation, land that is unceded – governed by the First Nations as the land was never signed over to the Crown in a Treaty. On the surface, the recognition of the land being unceded might be enough for one to say, “well if the Canadian government recognises the land isn’t theirs, surely they respect that?” and you would be forgiven for taking that view. Despite unceded land being recognised under Canadian common law, that doesn’t prohibit the colonial government from taking the land, settling on it, and building on it. I went to a University and lived in a house that were both built on land recognised as unceded, but not governed by the First Nations. Although twenty other First Nation executive councils had given consent to the portions of the pipeline that ran through their land, the Wet’suwet’en First Nation withheld their consent on ecological grounds. When it was made clear that the pipeline would be build anyway, protestors, both First Nation and settler-ally, occupied the unceded land through which the pipeline would be built, in an effort to protect it. This is when things got rather messy for the government. In January 2020, the Royal Canadian Mounted Police (RCMP) entered the land and cleared away the Wet’suwet’en protestors so that construction could begin. Men, women, and children were placed under arrest by the RCMP. These arrests sparked a nationwide protest in solidarity with the Wet’suwet’en First Nation, many of which targeted major transport links for goods, including railways. Within a matter of days, some major damage had been dealt to the Canadian economy. The bulk of the protests were in British Columbia, including at the provincial capital of Victoria, where a group of protestors led by Wet’suwet’en Youths occupied the front lawn of the British Columbia Parliament Building, an occupation that I attended on various days. This is where we see two narratives appearing – an internal narrative and an external narrative. The internal narrative came from within the protest movement. The narrative put forward by the protestors was that they were the underdogs, the latest in a long line of indigenous people to be oppressed by the Canadian government and their legitimate claims to their unceded land disregarded by a colonial system rigged against them (and they kind of have a point). In their eyes, they were taking a stand against imperialism and standing up for their ancestral homelands, righteous warriors in the face of imperialist aggression. This narrative was broadcast mostly by word of mouth, social media, and the few small media outlets sympathetic to the First Nations cause. On the flipside, you have the external narrative, that was put forward by the Canadian federal government, the British Columbia provincial government, and the mainstream media outlets. The narrative they put forward was that the protestors were a public nuisance that had to be dealt with, by force if necessary. They accused them of playing politics to bring Canada’s economy to a standstill, with one particular news outlet, CTV, producing a TV package to that effect. A big emphasis was placed on politicians trying hard to “find a solution”. What they omitted was that the solution included arresting the Wet’suwet’en Youths invited to talk to the BC government. Given the breadth and scope of the colonial power within Canada, this narrative was broadcast far wider than the internal narrative of the protest movement. The reason this narrative was able to take hold easier than the one put forward by the protestors is because the institution of colonialism is so deeply rooted in the average Canadian mindset that most people don’t even know they’re supporting that system. It also succeeds to outsiders in that it does not challenge the notion of Canada being this big, progressive utopia. It will probably come as no surprise to you when I say that I fall firmly on the side of the internal narrative as put forward by the First Nation protestors. As a journalist, I am in a constant state of critique about my own journalism and the journalism I consume, constantly assessing the narratives put forward, the agendas advanced, and the political viewpoint from which the narrative comes. From looking at the narrative put forward by the Canadian media at the time of the protest I could not help but feel a slight twinge of anger that I was about to enter a profession used to perpetuate and advance a colonialist agenda that caused harm to so many indigenous people. I looked at the coverage of the pipeline protests and saw it as a colonial government advancing a colonial agenda. I know what I am saying is part of a narrative that I have bought into, and whether you buy into this narrative or a different one altogether is a matter for yourself. What I am aiming to point out with this article is how narratives and storytelling can form the basis of a mass social movement but can also advance some pretty grim agendas. If you’re shocked to hear some of the very surface level details of the atrocities committed against the First Nations by the Canadian government, and I strongly recommend you read more about it, then that means the narrative of Canada being a big, progressive paradise is doing its job. It’s hidden the dark underbelly of Canada. It also means that maybe you should be a bit more critical of the narratives you consume. Articles and resources about mistreatment of the First Nations by the Canadian government. https://origins.osu.edu/article/canada-s-dark-side-indigenous-peoples-and-canada-s-150th-celebration. . https://soleildotpress.wordpress.com/2019/03/17/indigenous-health-in-canada/. . https://www.un.org/en/chronicle/article/discrimination-aboriginals-native-lands-canada. . Please note this is not an exhaustive list, but it will get you started,. Comment. Reblog. Subscribe Subscribed HK Norman - Journalism Already have a WordPress.com account? Log in now. HK Norman - Journalism. Already have a WordPress.com account? Log in now. HK Norman - Journalism Customize Subscribe Subscribed Sign up Log in Copy shortlink Report this content View post in Reader Manage subscriptions Collapse this bar. HK Norman - Journalism. Customize. Subscribe Subscribed. Sign up. Log in. Copy shortlink. Report this content. View post in Reader. Manage subscriptions. Collapse this bar. 