https://nationalpost.com/opinion/john-ivison-pipeline-issue-raises-important-question-who-speaks-for-first-nations

John Ivison: Pipeline dispute raises important question — who speaks for First Nations? Reconciliation means making one system compatible with another, not Indigenous law trumping Canadian law at the behest of some self-anointed aristocrats. You can save this article by registering for free here. Or sign-in if you have an account. Article content. The “territorial re-occupation” of land along the proposed Coastal GasLink pipeline in B.C. by hereditary chiefs of the Wet’suwet’en people has raised some thorny constitutional questions and some surprising interventions. The $6.2 billion, 670 km pipeline route runs from Dawson Creek, near the Alberta border, to Kitimat in B.C.’s north coast region, crossing through traditional Wet’suwet’en territory. Enjoy the latest local, national and international news. Exclusive articles by Conrad Black, Barbara Kay, Rex Murphy and others. Plus, special edition NP Platformed and First Reading newsletters and virtual events. Unlimited online access to National Post and 15 news sites with one account. National Post ePaper, an electronic replica of the print edition to view on any device, share and comment on. Daily puzzles including the New York Times Crossword. Support local journalism. Enjoy the latest local, national and international news. Exclusive articles by Conrad Black, Barbara Kay, Rex Murphy and others. Plus, special edition NP Platformed and First Reading newsletters and virtual events. Unlimited online access to National Post and 15 news sites with one account. National Post ePaper, an electronic replica of the print edition to view on any device, share and comment on. Daily puzzles including the New York Times Crossword. Support local journalism. Create an account or sign in to continue with your reading experience. Access articles from across Canada with one account. Share your thoughts and join the conversation in the comments. Enjoy additional articles per month. Get email updates from your favourite authors. Don't have an account? Create Account. The pipeline is supported by the five Wet’suwet’en bands, and their elected chiefs and councils. They point out the advantages for local communities – financial benefit agreements worth $338 million for the 20 bands along the route and contract work for indigenous businesses estimated at $620 million. Reginald Ogen, president of a company that has won a $75 million contract to provide camp facilities, has noted that the jobs may be short and medium term but the training “lasts a lifetime and provides future opportunities”. The project is opposed by the hereditary chiefs who represent the 13 Wet’suwet’en houses (12 are represented by the Office of the Wet’suwet’en, while the Dark House operates independently). Small groups of “land defenders” have blocked a bridge crucial to future development. Pipeline spat pitting hereditary leaders against elected band councils reveals intricacies of B.C. Indigenous governance. B.C. Premier John Horgan concedes defeat in legal battle against Trans Mountain pipeline. Band councils, hereditary chiefs play distinct governance roles: expert. This newsletter tackles hot topics with boldness, verve and wit. (Subscriber-exclusive edition on Fridays). By signing up you consent to receive the above newsletter from Postmedia Network Inc. A welcome email is on its way. If you don't see it, please check your junk folder. The next issue of Platformed will soon be in your inbox. We encountered an issue signing you up. Please try again. The project hit the headlines earlier this month when the United Nations Committee for the Elimination of Racial Discrimination called for an immediate stop to construction, only to be given pause for thought when it was pointed out to the committee chair that most communities along the route support the pipeline. B.C. Supreme Court justice, Marguerite Church, extended an injunction late last year that found in favour of the pipeline proponent and against the hereditary chiefs blocking construction. This has sparked a debate about who speaks for the Wet’suwet’en. Former justice minister Jody Wilson-Raybould weighed in with an opinion piece in the Globe and Mail last week that raised eyebrows. The independent MP for Vancouver Granville argued that Indigenous reconciliation requires moving beyond the Indian Act to systems of Indigenous governance that are created on the ground and recognized by others. So far, so good. But deconstructing the colonial reality, in Wilson-Raybould’s eyes, means blowing up the band councils. “The legal reality is that band councils are a creature of the colonial Indian Act and have limited delegated authority tied to reserves,” she said. “They do not have inherent authority, nor are they self-governing or an expression of self-determination. They cannot simply represent the proper rights holder – the broader group that shares a common language, culture and tradition – and typically there is more than one band within a given territory of an Indigenous people.”. Nowhere in her article does it stress the imperative point – they are elected and those claiming to speak for the broader First Nation are not. She doesn’t explicitly come out in favour of the hereditary chiefs over the elected band chiefs but she comes close – an extraordinary inclination from a democratically elected MP. In the case in question, all the band chiefs in the given territory are in favour of the pipeline proceeding. Most people would probably agree that it should be up to Indigenous people to decide on how they are governed. The government has suggested moving from 670 small bands to larger First Nations more capable of delivering services. There are no simple answers to these tough questions. But one would hope that whatever structure evolves is based on universal suffrage and democratic principles, rather than on some form of feudal genealogy. The hereditary chiefs contend that the Wet’suwet’en are represented by traditional governance structures and that, since the pipeline’s proponents were not given permission to enter unceded territory, they are in violation of Wet’suwet’en law. The elected chiefs beg to differ, resulting in considerable tension between the two groups. Reginald Ogen, who is a member of the Wet’suwet’en First Nation, contends his section 35 rights are being infringed by the blockade. Further confusion has emanated from an internal debate about who qualifies as a hereditary house chief. The lead defendants in the B.C. Supreme Court case claim to represent the Unist’ot’en people, which is not a governing body of the Wet’suwet’en. Madam Justice Church resolved that Indigenous customary laws are not an “effectual” part of Canadian law until they are somehow recognized in treaties or court declarations. As such, she said the idea that Indigenous laws supersede Canadian law and the B.C. government’s approval of the Coastal GasLink pipeline does not stand up to scrutiny. Her ruling gives RCMP the right to arrest people and remove camps designed to block pipeline construction. However, she did acknowledge that the question is complex and raises “significant constitutional questions.” Wilson-Raybould covered some of this terrain in her article, which called for a “foundational legislative shift through the development of a recognition and implementation of Indigenous rights framework”. What does foundational shift look like? In her last act as justice minister, Wilson-Raybould issued a directive on civil litigation involving Indigenous people that promoted negotiation and settlement, instead of drawn out court battles. Critics in the justice department felt the effect was to instruct government lawyers to litigate badly. Dwight Newman, the Canadian research chair in Indigenous Rights at the University of Saskatchewan, said the task of reconciling how Indigenous law intersects with Canadian law will be problematic. “There are no simple answers to these tough questions,” he said. But reconciliation means making one system compatible with another. As the B.C. Supreme Court rightly concluded, it does not mean Indigenous law trumping Canadian law at the behest of some self-anointed Indigenous aristocrats. • Email: jivison@postmedia.com | Twitter: IvisonJ. Share this Story : John Ivison: Pipeline dispute raises important question — who speaks for First Nations? Copy Link Email X Reddit Pinterest LinkedIn Tumblr. Copy Link. Email. X. Reddit. Pinterest. LinkedIn. Tumblr. Secret RCMP report warns Canadians may revolt once they realize how broke they are. Secret RCMP report warns Canadians may revolt once they realize how broke they are. She is 8, owns a $853K home and her dad says people angry about it obviously haven't 'made sacrifices'. She is 8, owns a $853K home and her dad says people angry about it obviously haven't 'made sacrifices'. Kate Middleton says she has cancer and is undergoing chemotherapy in new video. Kate Middleton says she has cancer and is undergoing chemotherapy in new video. FIRST READING: Liberal plan to quietly delay election would secure millions for their doomed MPs. FIRST READING: Liberal plan to quietly delay election would secure millions for their doomed MPs. Chris Selley: Anthony Housefather's place is not with the Conservatives. Chris Selley: Anthony Housefather's place is not with the Conservatives. Solar eclipse 2024: Get ready for the once-in-a-lifetime celestial event How to prepare for the Great North American Eclipse 1 hour ago Shopping Essentials. Solar eclipse 2024: Get ready for the once-in-a-lifetime celestial event. How to prepare for the Great North American Eclipse. Top fragrances: Most popular perfumes plus some hidden gems Dior, La Labo, Tom Ford, Aesop, Jo Malone and more 3 hours ago Shopping Essentials. Top fragrances: Most popular perfumes plus some hidden gems. Dior, La Labo, Tom Ford, Aesop, Jo Malone and more. Advertisement 2Story continues belowThis advertisement has not loaded yet, but your article continues below. Amazon Big Spring Sale: The best deals in Canada 2024 Shop top deals in spring fashion, cleaning products, home organization, fitness gear and more 5 hours ago Shopping Essentials. Amazon Big Spring Sale: The best deals in Canada 2024. Shop top deals in spring fashion, cleaning products, home organization, fitness gear and more. Cozey opens retail location in Toronto, the first of its kind for Canadian sofa-in-a-box brand Montreal-based entrepreneurs share their journey — thinking outside the box sometimes comes in boxes 5 hours ago Shopping Essentials. Cozey opens retail location in Toronto, the first of its kind for Canadian sofa-in-a-box brand. Montreal-based entrepreneurs share their journey — thinking outside the box sometimes comes in boxes. Coffee-tinted lips were a major Oscars makeup moment. Here's how to recreate the look at home This colouring offers a warm brown tone with a touch of pink. 1 day ago Fashion & Beauty. Coffee-tinted lips were a major Oscars makeup moment. Here's how to recreate the look at home. This colouring offers a warm brown tone with a touch of pink. This website uses cookies to personalize your content (including ads), and allows us to analyze our traffic. Read more about cookies here. By continuing to use our site, you agree to our Terms of Service and Privacy Policy. You've reached the 20 article limit. You can manage saved articles in your account. and save up to 100 articles! Looks like you've reached your saved article limit! You can manage your saved articles in your account and clicking the X located at the bottom right of the article. 