https://www.worldpipelines.com/project-news/16012023/coastal-gaslink-80-overall-completion/

Coastal Gaslink: 80% overall completion. Save to read list Published by Sara Simper, Editorial Assistant World Pipelines, Monday, 16 January 2023 13:00. As Coastal GasLink looks back on 2022, it is collaboration with their workers, Indigenous and local communities, government, and industry that stands out as the critical success factor as they head into their final year of construction. To date, Coastal GasLink has installed more than 490 km of pipe across the 670 km route, and steady progress is made each day. Cumulatively, Coastal GasLink’s team has spent more than 38 million hr working on this project, with more than 6000 people employed at its peak. Coastal GasLink’s achievements this year also extend beyond construction milestones; they have continued to deliver on their commitment of building an extraordinary and lasting legacy for British Columbia and beyond. “It’s an immense privilege to be able to work on a project that is building such an extraordinary legacy that will be enjoyed by so many,” said Bevin Wirzba, Coastal GasLink President. “Not only is this project providing jobs and economic benefits to local and Indigenous communities; this critical energy infrastructure will deliver energy security to the world for decades to come.”. The power of partnership. In alignment with Coastal GasLink’s commitment of collaboration and supporting economic reconciliation, many of their prime contractors have now partnered with Indigenous-owned businesses to build their respective sections. These partnerships have contributed to the US$1.4 billion being awarded to local and Indigenous businesses. Once construction is complete, Coastal GasLink look forward to officially becoming equity partners with Indigenous communities across the project route, as signed into agreement earlier this year. “When First Nations benefit, the whole region, the province, and Canada benefits – all of us benefit together,” said Chief Priscilla Mueller, Saik’uz First Nation, one of sixteen Indigenous communities who have joined the option to become equity owners in the Project. TC Energy, through Coastal GasLink, is proud to be leading the way in how energy projects are advanced in Canada. “When we bring our world-class energy expertise, and collaborate with Indigenous and local communities, we can deliver the energy the world needs while also protecting the environment, respecting local values, and advancing Indigenous reconciliation,” said Bevin Wirzba. “That is a future we are looking forward to, and one we are building each and every day on Coastal GasLink.”. Read the article online at: https://www.worldpipelines.com/project-news/16012023/coastal-gaslink-80-overall-completion/. You might also like. Brazil considers pipeline gas flow reversal to import more from Argentina. Brazil considers importing gas from Argentina's Vaca Muerta formation. Embed article link: (copy the HTML code below):. This article has been tagged under the following:. B.C. pipeline news Canada pipeline news Natural gas pipeline news Pipeline projects Pipeline construction projects TC Energy news Pipeline construction news. This content is available to registered readers of our magazine only. Please sign in or register for free. Benefits include. Access to locked videos & articles. Downloadable white papers. Full website access. Register for free » Get started now for absolutely FREE, no credit card required. Already a member? Sign in here. 